MINNESOTA POPULATION CENTER, UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA
IPUMS-International

[Cameroon 2005]
BUCREP
3rd General Population and Housing Survey
Enumerator Manual

[Text omitted, table of contents]

[Foreword, general instructions note, and section 1, 2 and 3 omitted]

Section 4: Preliminary work of surveying agent

4.1 Initial contact and identification of the counting zone (Z.D.)

The success of your work depends largely on the quality of your contacts with the authorities and the population. Your team leader will accompany you to the counting zone that has been assigned to you.
-Present yourself to the traditional authorities (neighborhood head or block head in an urban environment, village head or other important figure in the town in a rural environment);
-Tell them the purpose of your presence, and solicit their help to accomplish your mission;
-Check with them the list of towns/blocks that you are responsible for.

4.1.1 How to use the counting zone map

To properly use the map, you must first orient it, meaning hold it in a way so that each of the cardinals point on the map are turned towards its corresponding spot on the terrain.
-Orient your map by aligning the symbols of the map with the elements of the terrain that they represent
-Find two or three symbols on the map (schools, places of worship, mountains…);
-Turn the map horizontally until the symbols you found correspond to the parts of the terrain they represent

For more details regarding the identification and the definition of your counting zone:
-Determine the itinerary of your travels and communicate them to your team leader so that he can keep contact with you (consult the appendix page 72)
4.1.2 How to place an omitted or newly created village on the map

[Section omitted]

4.2 Structure numbering and filling out of the structure identification sheet

In urban zone, you need to number all the structures in the zone that are assigned to you before counting. To allow your team leader to find you easily, you will determine with him the starting point of the numbering as well as the direction of your progress during the counting.

In rural zones, this work will only be done once the configuration of the counting zone is ready; if not, the numbering of the structures and the counting will be done simultaneously.
Attention: the numbering of the structures in the counting zone that has been assigned to you should always be made with your team leader.

[Further instructions and examples omitted for the rest of this section]

Second part

Section 1. Presentation of Standard Household Questionnaire

1.1 Presentation of Standard Household Questionnaire
The numbering was planned to be done in 2003. This explains the discrepancy of dates between the questionnaire and the survey agent manual.

1.1.1 Structuring and contents of Standard Household Questionnaire
The "standard household" questionnaire is the main document with the transcription of information that was gathered from the populations that live in Cameroonian households, based on interviews conducted by survey agents in these households. It is made up of a number of classified variables in the following 5 distinct subdivisions:

1. identification characteristics of the household;
2. individual characteristics of members of the household
3. deaths occurring in the household over the last 12 months;
4. departures from Cameroon since January 1, 2000;
5. lodging characteristics.

Because of the abandonment of the system which captures the household questionnaire by scanning in favor of the traditional system of capture of the data of the 3rd RGPH (survey) by keyboard, we currently find ourselves with a standard household questionnaire with different subdivisions, of the following 4 types of variables:

1-open qualitative variables with incorporated codification grid
2- non-pre-coded closed qualitative variables and without incorporated codification grid
3-numeric variables with incorporated codification grid
4-numberic variables without incorporated codification grid.

1.1.2 Open qualitative variables with or without incorporated codification grid
The open qualitative variables are all those variables for which the different possible responses to the question asked are not numbers, but alphabetic elements (name) of a nomenclature, which are not included in the questionnaire. The surveying agent must write all the letters legibly, with the exact response provided by the person being interviewed, on the line reserved for this purpose in front of the position number of the column reserved for the recording of the numeric data of the person in question.

The open qualitative variables of the standard household questionnaire of the 3rd RGHP are called a codification gird once they are statistically exploitable; thus it is planned that in each codification gird column, each with two or three boxes where the codification of the data is transcribed, the numbers of the numeric codes corresponding to the answers are provided, previously transcribed in the questionnaire in a literal form. Conversely, the open qualitative variables without an incorporated codification grid are as such because they are not statistically exploitable; they are thus ignored during the codification phase.

The open qualitative variables of the standard household questionnaire of the 3rd RGPH, with or without an incorporated codification grid, are:

Subdivision 1-Household identification characteristics
i. Name of survey agent (without incorporated codification grid);
ii. Name of team leader (without incorporated codification grid);
iii. Name of controller (without incorporated codification grid).

Subdivision 2-Individual characteristics of household members
i. First and last name of members of the household (without incorporated codification grid);
ii. Birth place
iii. Location of usual residence
iv. Location of residence since January 1, 2000;
v. Location of former residence;
vi. Ethnicity/Nationality;
vii. Handicap;
viii. National languages
ix. Official languages
x. Type of education;
xi. Last grade level attended;
xii. Highest degree;
xiii. Profession;
xiv. Business activity
xv. Job;
xvi. Business sector

Subdivision 3-Deaths occurred in the last 12 months
i. Name of deceased (without incorporated codification grid);
ii. Cause of death.

Subdivision 4-Departures from Cameroon since January 1, 2000
i. Name of emigrant (without incorporated codification grid);
ii. Destination Country.

Subdivision 5-Housing characteristics
This subdivision does not include open qualitative variables with or without incorporated codification grid.

1.1.3 Closed qualitative variables not pre-coded without incorporated coding grid
The non-pre-coded closed qualitative variables are all the variables of the 3rd RGPH standard household questionnaire for which possible qualitative responses were pre-printed on the questionnaire. They are called non-pre-coded because the numeric code corresponding to each one of them isn't pre-printed because it was initially planned to come after data gathering by a scan of the questionnaire; for the same reasons it wasn't planned for these variables of the codification grid in the standard household questionnaire. Currently, this layout was changed and the data that was captured was done manually with a keyboard. The non-pre-coded closed qualitative variables of the standard household questionnaire are:

Subdivision 1- Household identification characteristics:
This subdivision does not include non-pre-coded closed qualitative variables without an incorporated codification grid.

Subdivision 2- Individual characteristics of household members
i. Sex;
ii. Living situation;
iii. Religion;
iv. Survival of father;
v. Survival of mother;
vi. School visits;
vii. Current school visits;
viii. Learning sector;
ix. Employment status
x. Type of employment
xi. Sector of employment

Subdivision 3-Deaths occurred in the household in the last 12 months
i. Sex;
ii. Death occurred after at least 3 months of immobilizing illness;
iii. Related to AIDS;
iv. Mode of transmission of AIDS.

Subdivision 4-Departures from Cameroon since January 1, 2000:
i. Sex;
ii. Main reason for departure

Subdivision 5- Housing characteristics:
i. Type of structure;
ii. Main material of walls;
iii. Main material of roof;
iv. Main material of ground/flooring
v. Type of toilet;
vi. Occupation status;
vii. Main source of light;
viii. Main source of energy for the kitchen;
xi. Main source of drinking water;
x. Method of sewage disposal;
xi. Method of evacuation of household garbage;
xii. Settlement site;
xiii. Main access road to place of residence.

[Paragraph omitted]

NB: For the following variables, "type of employment", "employment sector", "Main source of drinking water", and "Main access road to place of residence", the questionnaire does not contain all of the terms of the variable: complementary terms which are marked after those in the questionnaire are marked in the Surveying Agent Manual: you must transcribe them in your scratch notebook and refer to them to correctly mark certain terms of these variables.

[Examples omitted]

1.1.4 Numeric variables

[Section omitted]

Subdivision 1: Identification characteristics of the household:
1. Province;
2. Department;
3. District;
4. Administrative district (canton)/Group/City;
5. Village/city neighborhood;
6. Town/block;
7. Counting zone;
8. Structure number;
9. Household number in the structure;
10. Questionnaire number;
11. Summary table.

Subdivision 2-Individual characteristics of household members:
1. Other number (without incorporated codification grid);
2. Family relation to the household;
3. Age;
4. Date of birth;
5. Marital status (without incorporated codification grid);
6. Length of residence in usual location;
7. Number of live born children;
8. Number of live born children still living;
9. Number of live born children born over the course of the last 12 months (without incorporated codification grid)

Subdivision 3: Deaths occurring in the household over the 12 months:
1. Date of death;
2. Age of deceased.

Subdivision 4- Departures from Cameroon since January 1 2000:
1. Year of departure (without incorporated codification grid);
2. Age at departure.

Subdivision 5- Housing characteristics:
Number of bedrooms in the lodging.

In this numeric variable listing of the 3rd RGPH standard household questionnaire, certain variables are normally true open qualitative variables, but the codification will be done on the terrain by the surveying agent during the numbering; there are also numeric variables for which it wasn't planned to fit it codification grids in the standard household questionnaire, for the reasons always listed in the previous paragraphs. Because of all these factors, it will be difficult to master the codes related to the variables given the large number of possible cases. In these conditions, we ask the surveying agent to follow the following instructions:

[Instructions omitted]

Subdivision 1: Identification characteristics and location of household

This subdivision presents a number of key concepts that are prerequisite to mastering the procedure on how to fill out the identification characteristics of the household in the counting zone.

1.1 Some useful definitions
Province: The province is the largest administrative subdivision of Cameroon. The county has 10: Adamaoua; Center; East; Far North; Littoral; North, North-west; West; South; and South-west.

Department: This is a territorial unit just below the province. Cameroon has 58.

District: Each department is divided into quarters or even districts. Cameroon has 269 quarters and 54 districts.

Administrative district (canton)/grouping: The administrative district designates a traditional command unit with a leader, which is an intermediate unit between an quarter/quarter or district and a third degree traditional chiefdom (village or neighborhood).

After the department or the province, an administrative district can have one of the following designations: Grouping, Sultanate, Lamidat, Lawanat, Sector, Customary court area, Top chiefdom.

City: A city corresponds to all groups of inhabitants who fit at least one of the two criteria below:
-To be the administrative center or a district, an quarter, a department, or a province;
-To have an agglomerated population of at least 5000 residents and to have the following infrastructure:
-A secondary or post-primary learning establishment
-A health care facility
-A working systems for the distribution of water and electricity
-A daily market
City neighborhood:

A neighborhood is a subdivision of a city led by a third degree traditional leader. A neighborhood is identified by its official name. It may also be divided into blocks.

Block: The block is a subdivision of a neighborhood in an urban zone lead by a block leader. However, not all neighborhoods are necessarily divided into blocks.

Village: A village is a traditional command unit with a leader of the third degree, usually dependant on a leader of the second or first degree. It is made up of one or more towns.

Residential environment: This includes urban environments and rural environments. The urban environment is all the higher defined cities together; all the villages grouped together make up a rural environment.

Town: The town is an inhabited site, meaning a group of homes, defined by space, generally identified by a name recognized by the population and attached to a village. These are similar to hamlets, agricultural, fisher, or breeder camps and isolated residents.

Counting zone: The counting zone is an inhabited portion of the national territory given to a surveying agent. A counting zone can be comprised of a town or several towns, a village or several villages, a block or several blocks, and even a neighborhood.

Structure: A structure is a building or a group of building separated and isolated, and sheltering a person, a group f people, or several groups of people.

[Figure 1, omitted]

Figure 1: Some types of structures
Considered as structures:
-Isolated house: this is a house that is not attached to any other construction
-House with several accommodations: This is a house in one piece divided into several independent living units and located at the same level.
-Modern villa: This is an isolated house made of permanent materials, large, and with certain objects of standing (gate, pool, garden…)
- Religious space: A group of buildings or constructions made up of several housing units.

Housing unit: A housing unit is the group of locations used by a household for its lodging in a structure. These locations can be situated in an individual building, in a part of a building, or in a group of buildings near each other.

Standard household: A standard household is a person or a group of people related or not, living in the same housing unit, often taking their meals together and working together on the other essential needs. This group generally recognizes the authority of one person who is called the Head of Household.

Communal household: this is a group of people, who for non-family reasons which are mainly related to profession, health, school, denomination, or detention, live together in a specialized establishment or institution like a workers camp, military barracks, dormitories, a hospital with rooms, a convent, an orphanage, a prison.
As such, people belonging to one of the following categories are part of communal households:
-military personnel, police officers, who live in camps or barracks without their family;
-students in middle schools, high schools, and other learning establishments who live in dormitories or residents halls;
-prisoners who are detained in prisons or on house arrest;
-travelers who live in hotels or family boarding houses
-hospitalized sick people who are in hospitals or other heath care establishments for more than 6 months;
-workers who live temporarily at the construction site without their family
-members of a religious community who live in convents or in dormitories.

The first subdivision in the questionnaire provides information to identify the household and to locate it in the counting zone. You must know that all the households in your counting zone must be visited and all the members of each household must be surveyed.

The following instructions will help you fill out the different subdivisions of the questionnaire.

All of the sections: Fill them out with care, closely following the instructions which have been given to you.

[Text omitted Section 1.2 and examples]

Summary table

The summary table is meant to summarize the result of the counting of the population living in the household. It shouldn't be filled out until the end of the household census, meaning once you're sure you've surveyed all the member of the household.

To fill out, the survey agent needs to be sure that:
1. All the people subject to be registered in a standard household, either as a present resident or an absent resident, or as a visitor, have been registered.
2. All the variables of the questionnaire are filled out and filled out well, meaning that the pertinent questions were asked to the appropriately targeted people and that the answers obtained were properly transcribed on the questionnaire.
3. The identification variables and the location of the household are all correctly filled out
4. The numbering of the questionnaire used for registering the people living in the household was properly done.

If all these pre-conditions were completed, then the survey agent proceeds to the counting of the people registered in the household based on their "situation of residence" and of their "sex" as follows:
1. Do the breakdown of the men and of the women starting with the elements that are on the first page of the questionnaire under the rubric "sex' and determine the total number of people counted in the household and transcribe the result of this counting by sex in the scratch notebook.
2. Check on the 2nd page of the questionnaire and report on the bottom of each column, in the white part by rubric 11: "Location of residence 5 years ago" formerly "Location of residence in 1998", the code of the sex of the individual for which the data was reported in the column are "M" is male and "F" is female
3. Do the breakdown of the people counted in the household as "resident present" based on their sex, then transcribe the result of this breakdown in the scratch notebook
4. Do the breakdown of the people counted in this household as "absent resident" based on their sex, then transcribe the result of this breakdown in the scratch notebook
5. Do the breakdown of the people counted in this household as "visitor" based on their sex, then transcribe the result of this breakdown in the scratch notebook
6. Check to make sure the results of these new breakdowns are consistent with the first count based on sex.

If there are no errors, everything is consistent, then the survey agent must transcribe these results in the appropriate grid spaces located under the rubric "summary table" on the first page of the questionnaire. The household counting is done, the survey agent must put his things in order, thank the head of household and all those individuals who were willing to answer questions, and ask for directions;

If on the contrary there are errors, meaning the results from the final counting are not at all consistent with the results of the first counting, the household counting is not finished, the survey agent must start over the counting to get to rigorously consistent results.

[Text omitted, bolded sections]

Physically present population
The physically present population is the sum of the "Total Residents Present" + "Total Visitors"
- Mark the result of this addition in its properly reserved space

Legal population
The legal population is the sum of the "Total Residents Present" + "Total Residents absent"
- Mark the result of this addition in its properly reserved space

On the summary table, you must, after having made the necessary calculations, mark the headcount of the surveyed people residing in a household by sex as well as the total, based on their situation of residence.

N.B. This table should not be filled out until the end of the complete surveying of the household, on questionnaire number 1 if several questionnaires are filled out in a household.

Subdivision 2: Individual characteristics of household members

Questions 5: order number to 9: Residential situation- These questions are addressed to all people counted in the household.

The goal of this subdivision is to allow the collection of data related to individual characteristic of household members.

Order number

The members of a standard household needs to be identified by an order number with 2 digits starting with number "01" which is the number given to the head of household. In the current "standard household" questionnaire the order numbers have only one digit, from 1 to 6, and were pre-printed on the first page of the questionnaire in column number 5 "First and last names". You must ignore them and transcribe in a clear and readable manner, in the proper location, the new two digit order numbers as follows: If a standard household has 4 people, in place of the pre-printed "1" on the questionnaire, write "01", in place of the "2", mark "02", in place of the "3" mark "03" and in place of the "4" mark "04". A standard household can have less than 6 people or more than 6 people. In situations where the household has more than 6 people, the surveying agent must use as many questionnaires as necessary to register all of the people living in that particular household. Several situations must be distinguished:
1. The household has fewer than 7 people: in this case, the survey agent only fills out one questionnaire for this household; the order number of the people registered in the household will go from "01" for the head of household to "06" maximum,

2. The household has between 7 and 12 people: in this situation the survey agent must fill out 2 questionnaires for this household. The order numbers of the registered people in the first questionnaire will go from "01" for the head of household to "06"; the first person registered on the 2nd questionnaire will have order number "07", the next "08" and so on until a maximum of "12";

3. The household has between 13 and 18 people: in this situation the survey agent must fill out 3 questionnaires for this household. The order numbers of the registered people in the first questionnaire will go from "01" for the head of household to "06" and the order number for the people registered on the 2nd questionnaire will go from "07" to "12". The first person registered on the 3rd questionnaire will have order number "13", the next "14 and so on until a maximum of "18";

And so on.

You must renumber based on the numbers pre-printed on the questionnaires.
-Number the members of the household from 01 to n.

For the first questionnaire, these numbers are 01, 02, 03, 04, 05, 06. For the additional questionnaire, these numbers go from 07 to n.

Last names and first names
To gather the exact identity reference of the person being surveyed if this person is illiterate, the survey agent must ask him for an authentic document containing information on his identity: last names and first names, date of birth and location of birth. For people who know how to read and write in French or in English, the agent asks questions and marks the answers; in case of difficulties, he can ask the person to spell his name.

To draw up the list of household members, follow the instructions below:
-Ask the guarantor (the head of household or his representative) to list for you the names of everyone who spent the night before your first visit in the household as well as those household members who are absent if it has been less than 6 months since the date of their departure;
-Draw up this list in your scratch notebook;
-Legibly write the last names and first names of all the household members according to the following order:
1. head of household: He will always have number 01 on the first questionnaire filled out for the household;
2. unmarried children of the head of household who do not have children in the household and whose other parent does not live in the household;
3. the spouse or spouses of the head of household, each followed by her unmarried children who do not have children in the household;
4. children of the head of household married or not, followed eventually by their spouse(s)or not, then followed by their unmarried children without children in the household;
5. other relatives of the head of household married or not, followed by their spouse(s) or not, and by their unmarried children without children in the household;
6. member of the household not related to the head of household, eventually followed by their spouses and their children;
7. finally, visitors.

N.B. The list of household members, and the entire first page of the questionnaire are not filled out until the first visit to the household by the survey agent. This information cannot be modified if you were to find that there has been an error in the list of people (an omission or an error about the information). Consequently, the departures and arrivals observed by people in the household during the numbering should not in any case be taken into account after the first visit. The registration order should be respected on the entire questionnaire.

Sex
-Mark the code corresponding to the sex of each person surveyed after his name.

If you have doubts about the sex, you can formulate the question in the following way:
"Just to be certain, is Ramadan a man or a woman?"
-Conversely, avoid questions like "What is you sex, ma'am?"

Codes of the terms of the sex variable are:
1 = Male
2 = Female,

N.B. The answer is required. Non-responses are not accepted.

Family relationship in the household: This is a relation by marriage, by blood, or by adoption that unites the member of the household together.
-Ask one of the following questions:
Q. "Who is X to you?" if the question is asked to the head of household (HH);
Q. "Who are you to the HH?" if the question is asked to the relevant person;
Q. "Who is X to the HH?" if the question is asked to a third party who is neither the head of household, nor the person relevant to this question.
-Mark in the reserved spaces the family relationship code in the household for each person surveyed.

The Codes of the terms of the family relationship variable are the following:
10 = HH
11 = unmarried children of HH whose other parent does not live in the household
20 = spouse of HH
21 = unmarried children of spouse of HH where he is not the other biological parent
22 = unmarried children of the HH and of his spouse
23 = other singletons related to the spouse of the HH
30 = Father or mother of CM, living in the household with his partner in the household and/or their progeny
31 = Spouse of the father or mother of the HH
32 = unmarried children of this couple or to one member of this couple
33 = other singletons related to this couple or to one member of this couple
40 = child of HH or of spouse of HH, living in the household with his spouse and/or their progeny
41 = partner of child of HH
42 = unmarried child of this couple or of one member of this couple
43 = Son-in-law of the HH or daughter-in-law of HH whose spouse (son or daughter of HH) doesn't live in the household
44 = other singletons related to this couple
50 = Brother/sister of HH, living alone or with his spouse and/or their progeny in the household
51 = spouse of brother/sister of household
52 = unmarried child of this couple or of one member of this couple
53 = Brother-in-law or sister-in-law of HH whose spouse (brother or sister of HH) is not in the household
54 = other related singletons to this couple or one of its members
60 = Other relatives of HH, living in the household alone or with his spouse and/or progeny
61 = spouse of ‘other relative' of HH
62 = unmarried children of this couple or of one member of this couple
63 = other singletons related to this couple or to one member of this couple
70 = Other relative of the spouse of the HH, living in the household with his spouse and/or their progeny in the household
71 = spouse of in-laws of HH
72 = unmarried children of this couple or of one of its members
73 = Other singletons related to this couple or to one of its members
80 = Person without family relation to HH, living alone or with his spouse and/or their progeny in the household
81 = spouse of person without family relation to HH
82 = unmarried child of this couple or of one of its members
83 = other singleton related to this couple or to one of its members
-on top of pages 2 to 5, in lieu and in place of the names of the household members registered on the page, recopy their order number respecting the columns reserved to each of them

6. Age and date of birth

Date of birth:
The date of birth of an individual indicates the day, the month, and the year of their birth. There are individuals who know the exact date of their birth, there are some who do not know the full date of their birth but know at least the month and the year of their birth.

The age of an individual is the number of years lived by this individual since the day of his birth to today.

The age in years passed expresses the number of whole years lived by this individual since his birth. The age that will be considered is the age in years passed

If we do not know the exact date of birth of an individual, but only the year of his birth, calculate the age at the birthday reached in the year by calculating the difference of years. As such, a person who was born in 2000 will be 5 years old in 2005, meaning he will have reached his 5th birthday in 2005.

[Text omitted, examples]

7. Location of birth
The location of birth is, for people born in Cameroon, the quarter/district in which they were born. For people born outside of Cameroon, the location of birth if the country where they were born.

If the person being surveyed has civil status certificate or a national identity card, this information exists in those documents:
-Take this information and transcribe it in the questionnaire while respecting the rules below which define the location of birth.

If the person does not have a civil status certificate, ask him the following question:
Q. Where you born in Cameroon? If the answer is YES,

Ask the following question:
Q. What district or quarter where you born in?
-Mark the answer on the dotted line corresponding with the registration order number of the surveyed person (if it's a quarter that still exists)

If the person was born in Cameroon and knows the town he was born in, but isn't able to connect it to an quarter or a district, ask him the following question:
Q. Which administrative district or grouping is attached to the town in question?
-Do not write anything in the questionnaire. Take the information from the scratch notebook, specifying the names of those in the household and the order number of the relevant person and inform the team leader so as to find a solution together.

If the answer is No, the person was born outside of Cameroon, ask him the following question:
Q. Which country were you born in?
-Mark the answer provided on the dotted line corresponding to the registered order number of the surveyed person.
Q. In which quarter were you born, was _____ born in?
-Then ask him if this location was in a city or a town (based on the location of residence at the time of birth);
-Mark in the proper space the code for his location of birth (1=urban, 2=rural).

Example 2:
Question: "What quarter was X born in?"
Answer: "Obala".
Additional question: "Was it Obala proper or a village in the district of Obala?"

If it was a village:
-Mark 2, which corresponds to the code for a rural space.

NB. You must consider the changes that occurred after the current administrative re-zoning which may affect the quarter/district of birth of the surveyed person.
Consequently, only mark the current quarter which is attached to the town declared by the surveyed person.
-Ask for his birth country if he was born abroad.
-Mark the name of this country on the dotted line that corresponds to the registration order of the surveyed person.

8. Marital status

N.B. The question on marital status is only asked to men over the age of 15 and women over the age of 12.

Marital status is defined by the existence or not of a marital relationship between two people of opposite sex. Considering laws and customs in effect, we distinguish:

Single: all people who have never been married are considered single.

Married: all people joined by law, tradition, or religion to another person of opposite sex are considered married.

Separated: all people who were left by or separated from their spouse, legally or not, but for whom the divorce hasn't been declared are considered separated; nevertheless, a polygamous man separated from one of his spouses remains married.

Divorced: all people who broke all ties (legally or traditional) which joined them to a spouse and who did not remarry are considered divorced, nevertheless, a polygamist who divorced one of his wives remains married.
Widow: All people whose spouse is deceased, and who did not remarry are considered widows, nevertheless, a polygamist with a spouse who died remains married.

Cohabitation: all people who cohabitate with a person of the opposite sex without a civil, traditional, or religious marriage

The codes of the terms of the marital status variable are:
0 = single
1 = man married to 1 spouse or woman married to 1 man having 1 spouse
2 = man married to 2 women or woman married to 1 man having 2 spouses
3 = man married to 3 women or woman married to 1 man having 3 spouses
4 = man married to 4 women or woman married to 1 man having 4 spouses
5 = man married to 5 or more women or woman married to 1 man having 5 or more spouses
6 = cohabitation
7 = separated
8 = divorced
9 = widow
Q. Are you, is _______ married?
-Mark in the proper space the marital status code provided.

9. Living situation
The concept of living/residence is linked to that of the usual home as well as to the length of time spent in that household or out of that household, which is based on the length of reference which starts at 6 months (based on the survey date).

As such, a person is considered a "resident" in the household if they have habitually lived there for 6 months or for less than 6 months but with the intention to stay more than 6 months (example: a newly married woman; a civil servant newly appointed and joined by his family). This variable allows us to class individuals based on their stay in the household.

The Codes of the terms of the living situation variable are:
1-Resident present
2-Resident absent
3-Visitor

A resident is considered a Present Resident if he spend the night before the first visit by the survey agent in the household. Nevertheless, a baby born the day of the visit by the surveying agent should be considered a present resident member of the household even if he is still in the hospital with his mother who is also considered a present resident in the household.

A resident is considered absent if he did not spend the night before the first visit by the surveying agent in the household. This absence should not exceed more than 6 months.

All non-resident individuals having spent the night before the first visit by the survey agent are considered visitors. The total length of his stay in the household should not exceed 6 months.

A person registered as an "absent resident' on the first visit keeps that status even if he returns to the household over the surveying period. This person can answer the question regarding himself. Similarly, a person with the status of "present resident" keep this status even if he travels after the first visit to the household. Thus after the first visit of the surveying agent, it is impossible to update the list of members of the household.

People working at night have the status of present resident if they spend the night before the first visit of the surveying agent in their place of work.
-Mark in the space provided the code of living situation of the surveyed person.

Attention: All students living in dormitories or going to school elsewhere and spending the night before your first visit in the household elsewhere must be surveyed as visitors.

N.B. Residents being held at any type of police station will be surveyed in their normal household. Conversely, prisoners will be surveyed in their communal household. Those accompanying ailing non-residents will be surveyed in the communal household whereas those accompanying residents will be surveyed in their normal household.

10. Usual location of residence

NB.: This variable is only used for visitors (CF. Question 9 for sorting)
The usual location of residence of visitors is the quarter or district where the surveyed person lived for more than 6 months, or where he has the intention of living for more than 6 months if he has lived there for less than 6 months.
Q. Where does _______ usually live?
-Mark this name (quarter/district or foreign country) on the dotted line corresponding to the registered order of the surveyed person.
Attention: Two situations may present themselves:

a) For visitors who reside in Cameroon,
-Mark on the dotted line corresponding to the registered order the name of the current quarter or district where the visitor usually lives.

b) For visitors who reside outside of Cameroon,
-Mark in the full name on the dotted line corresponding to the registered order the name of the country where the visitor usually lives.

[Examples omitted]

Question 11 and after should only be asked to present and absent household residents.

11. Place of residence in 2000
The variable for the place of residence in 2000 is for all people born before January 1 2000. Ask all these people the following questions:
What was your main place of residence in 2000?

If the main place of residence was Cameroon,
-Mark the quarter or the district on the dotted line corresponding to the registration order number of the surveyed person.

If the main location of residence is outside of Cameroon,
-Mark the country on the dotted line corresponding to the registration order number of the surveyed person.
-Then ask them if the location was a city or a village
-Mark in the proper space the place of residence code in 2000 (1 = urban, 2 = rural)

12. Former place of residence
The former place of residence is the quarter or the district where the surveyed person lived (for at least 6 months) right before moving to the place of residence during the surveying of Cameroon, or the country if they lived abroad.
Where did ____ live before moving to the current, typical place of residence?

-Mark the name (quarter/district or foreign country) on the dotted line corresponding to the registration order number of the surveyed person.

If the answer is Yes, 2 situations may present themselves
a) The former place of residence was in Cameroon,
-Mark the name of the quarter or district corresponding to the former place of residence on the dotted line corresponding to the registration order number of the surveyed person.

Then ask the following question:
Q. Was the town in which you lived in this quarter or in this district the main authority of the quarter or district or of a village?
b) The former place of residence was outside of Cameroon,
-Mark the full name of the country of former residence on the dotted line corresponding to the registration order number of the surveyed person.

Then ask the following question:
Q. The town that you lived in, in this country, was it in an urban location (city) or a rural one (village)?

[Examples omitted]

Then ask him the following question:
Q. Did you live in Mbalmayo or a village in this quarter or in this district?
-Mark in the space provided the code for the former place of residence (1 = urban, 2 = rural)

[Example C omitted]

Then ask him the following question:
Q. Did you live in Sa'a or a village in this quarter or in this district?
-Mark in the space provided the code for the former place of residence (1 = urban, 2 = rural)


13. Length of stay
This is the amount of time in years passed (whole number of years passed) since the person moved to the quarter or district where they currently live.

Q. How many years have you lived/has ______ lived in this quarter/district/country?

If a person is a resident, that means they are a long term resident in the quarter/district you are surveying.

a) If the quarter or the district of birth is the same as the current location of residence and as the former location of residence, then the person in question has never moved, they live in the current quarter/district since birth.
-Mark "since birth" on the dotted line corresponding to the registration order number of the surveyed person.

If the length of the residence is less than one year,
-Mark ‘00' in the reserved space while respecting the registration order number of the surveyed person.

For people who have had a length of residence of less than 98 years,
-Mark the length of residence in the reserved space

For people who have a length of stay over to or equal to 98 years,
-Mark 98 in the reserved spaces

[Section b omitted]

14. Nationality
Attention: The "Ethnicity" variable was withdrawn from the final list of variables in the 3rd RGPH. For Cameroonians as well as for foreigners, we only ask the question on "Nationality"

Nationality is the belonging as a citizen of one person to one country or to one state.
Q. What is your nationality?
-Mark in the abbreviated form CAM for all people with the Cameroonian nationality
-For all other nationalities, legibly mark the name of the country on the dotted line corresponding to the registration order number of the surveyed person;
-Record the first nationality mentioned by the individuals with dual citizenship

[Examples omitted]

15. Religion
Q. What is your religion?/ What is _____'s religion?

Religion is a set of beliefs and practices which govern the relationship between a person and a divinity or in a general way, the sacred. There are conventional religions and traditional religions. The codes of the terms of the religion variable for the 3rd RGPH are:

1. Catholic: this category groups together the Roman Catholic Church
2. Orthodox: these are member of the Orthodox Church
3. Protestant: This term includes the Cameroonian Presbyterian Church (EPC), the Union of Baptist Churches of Cameroon (UEBC), the Lutheran Church, the Methodist Church, the Evangelical Church of Cameroon (EEC), the African Presbyterian Church (EPA), the 7th Day Adventist Church, the Cameroonian Orthodox Presbyterian Church, (EPCO), the Native Baptist Convention (NBC)
4. Other Christian: This term groups all other Christian religions such as Pentecostals, the True Church of Christ, the Messianic Evangelic Church of Cameroon (EMEC), the Apostolic Church, The Mission of the Full Gospel, the Living World Fellowship, The Bethel Mission, Jehovah's Witnesses, and all other Christian churches not classified elsewhere.
5. Muslim: this category groups together all those who profess to the Islamic religion, all types mixed together.
6. Animist: this category groups together all followers of animism (a belief that attributes a soul to all animals, all phenomenon, and all natural objects)
7. Other religion
8: Free thinker: this category groups together all those who do not claim any religion and who have their own way of thinking on this subject.
-Mark in the reserved space the religion code of the person surveyed.

16. Chronic illness/dominant handicap

a- Chronic illness
A chronic illness is all illnesses that evolve slowly, are prolonged and remain for a long time. The chronic illnesses which are objects of study in the framework of the 3rd GRPH are:
Basic Terms Code
No chronic illness 00
Diabetes 01
Hypertension 02
Cancer 03
Asthma 04
Tuberculosis 05
Sickle cell anemia 06
Epilepsy 07

To get the response related to the chronic illness, ask the surveyed person the 7 following questions:
Q1. Are you/is _____ suffering from diabetes?
Q2. Are you/is _____ suffering from hypertension?
Q3. Are you/is _____ suffering from cancer?
Q4. Are you/is _____ suffering from asthma?
Q5. Are you/is _____ suffering from tuberculosis?
Q6. Are you/is _____ suffering from sickle cell anemia?
Q7. Are you/is _____ suffering from epilepsy?

If the answer is Yes to any of these questions,
-Mark the code/s for the chronic illness/es on the dotted line corresponding to the registration order number of the surveyed person.

If at the end of the series of seven questions, the answers are No,
-Mark ‘00' on the on the dotted line corresponding to the registration order number of the surveyed person, meaning that the person doesn't have any of these illnesses.
-Mark a vertical line to note the difference between these answers and the handicap variable.

b- Handicap
A handicap is the disadvantage that a person endures due to a disability or an infirmity which prevents him from fulfilling completely or partially a task that could normally be done by a person similar to him in age, sex, and different cultural factors.

One is considered handicapped if they need the assistance of specific equipment. As such, a handicapped person is one does not have complete physical or mental autonomy.

Here is a list of basic handicaps that the 3rd RGPH has retained:
Basic terms Code
No handicap 00
Deaf 01
Mute 02
Blind 04
Leprous 08
Upper limbs disabled 16
Lower limbs disabled 32
Mental illness 64
Albino 128
Other handicap 256
-Ask the following question:
Q. Does the surveyed person have a/any handicap/s?

NB: If the handicap is clearly visible, mark it and go on to the following question.
-Mark after the vertical line the handicap code or codes, on the dotted line corresponding to the order number of the surveyed person.

[Examples omitted]

17. Survival of father
This is a matter of knowing if the father of the surveyed person is still alive or is deceased.
Q. If your father/ ______'s father still alive?
-Mark in the proper space the code corresponding to the answer provided (1 = Yes, 2 = No, 3 = Don't know)

18. Survival of mother
This is a matter of knowing if the mother of the surveyed person is still alive or is deceased.
Q. Is your mother/ ______'s mother still alive?
-Mark in the proper space the code corresponding to the answer provided (1 = Yes, 2 = No, 3 = Don't know)

N.B. This is regarding biological parents.

19. National languages (literacy)
The question related to this variable is only relevant for people 12 years and older.

Literacy is an individual's aptitude for reading and writing, and the ability to understand a text in relation to facts of everyday life, in any language (national language, foreign language).

In the Questionnaire, we've written national languages in the plural; however, for the standard order questions, this question only relates to literacy of the main national language. Also, there is only one answer possible for each eligible individual.
-Ask if the surveyed person knows how to read and write in the any national language.

If the answer is Yes, ask him the following question:
Q. In what main national language does the surveyed person know how to best read and write?

-Mark the name of the main language declared on the dotted line corresponding to the registration order number of the surveyed person.

If the answer is No,
-Mark "no" on the dotted line corresponding to the registration order number of the surveyed person.

The national languages of Cameroon retained in 3rd RGPH are:

[Languages omitted, except the last two codes below]

83=Other
00=None

20. Official languages
The questions related to this variable are only relevant for people 12 years and older.

Official languages are French and English. The question should be asked for each of the two languages. We are looking to find out if the person knows how to read, write, or speak at least one of the official languages.

For English:
Q. Does the surveyed person know how to read, write, and speak English?
-Ask if the surveyed person knows how to read English (1=Yes, 2=No)
-Ask if the surveyed person knows how to write in English (1=Yes, 2=No)
-Ask if the surveyed person knows how to speak English (1=Yes, 2=No)
-For each question asked, mark on the corresponding bubble the appropriate code.

For French:

Q. Does the surveyed person know how to read, write, and speak French?
-Ask if the surveyed person knows how to read French (1=Yes, 2=No)
-Ask if the surveyed person knows how to write in French (1=Yes, 2=No)
-Ask if the surveyed person knows how to speak French (1=Yes, 2=No)
-For each question asked, mark on the corresponding bubble the appropriate code.

21. Previous school attendance
This question related to this variable is only for people aged 3 years and older.

School attendance refers to attendance in a public or private (secular or religious) educational establishment, to be a regular student at any level and during a specifically determined period of time.
-First ask the surveyed person if they have already been to school:

Q. Have you/has ______ already been to school?
If the answer is yes,
-Ask in what system and mark the code corresponding to the answer provided.

Codes for the terms of this variable are as follows:
1-French and English
2-French
3-English
4-Other system
5-Never been to school

If the answer to this question is No,
-Mark code ‘5' and go to Q 27

22. Current school attendance
Q. Do you/does ____ currently go to an educational establishment?
If the answer is Yes,
-Ask about the system (French or English) and mark the code corresponding to the answer provided.

Codes for the terms of this variable are as follows:
1-French and English
2-French
3-English
4-Other system
5-Doesn't currently go to school

N.B. Questions Q23 and Q24 are about people who have stopped going to school as well as those who are currently going to an educational establishment (Eliminate the filter that is on the Q22 level of the Standard Household Questionnaire). Questions Q23 to Q26 are about:
a. the previous educational situation, the last position as a student, for people who have stopped currently going to an educational establishment.
b. the educational situation at the moment for people who are currently students

23. Type of educational institution
The type of education represents the nature of the education (general, technical, or professional education) that the individual is pursuing.

The Codes of the terms of this variable are:
01 = Education of the Koran (Muslim religious education)
02 = Pre-school or nursery school
03 = Elementary school
04 = First cycle, general high school
05 = First cycle, technical high school
06 = Training with Elementary Education Certificate
07 = Post-elementary education
08 = Second cycle, general high school
09 = Second cycle, technical high school
10 = Training in General Certificate Secondary Education
11 = Education in Probationary training
12 = Higher education/university
99 = Undetermined type of education

Q. What type of education did you/did ___ get?
Following the registration order:
- Mark the type of education declared dotted line corresponding with the registration order number of the surveyed person legibly;
-Mark in the reserved spaces the code of the type of education done by the surveyed person.

24. Education sector (Type of education)
In Cameroon, there are three sectors of education:
1- The public sector comprises of the establishments belonging to the State and under the authority if the State;
2- The religious private sector comprises of establishments belonging to religious organizations
3- The secular private sector comprises establishments belonging to individuals

Q. What education sector did you/did ______ attend?
-Mark in the designated space the code of the education sector of the surveyed person in the space reserved (1 = public, 2 = religious private, 3 = secular private)

25. Last grade attended
This is the last grade attended by the surveyed person, whether they passed or not.
Q. What was the last grade you were in/was _______ in?

Codes for terms of this variable are as follows:
Last grade attended/Code
No level 000
Education of the Koran:
[Specific years omitted: codes 011-013]
Unspecified 019

Preschool or nursery school
[Specific years omitted: codes 021-023]
Unspecified 029

Elementary school
[Specific years omitted: codes 031-039]
Unspecified 039

1st cycle, General high school
[Specific years omitted: codes 041-044]
Unspecified 049

1st cycle, Technical high school
[Specific years omitted: codes 051-054]
Unspecified 059

Training in General Certificate Secondary Education
[Specific years omitted: codes 061-063]
Unspecified 069

Post primary (SAR, SM…)
[Specific years omitted: codes 071-074]
Unspecified 079

2nd cycle, General high school
[Specific years omitted: codes 081-083]
Unspecified 089

2nd cycle, Technical high school
[Specific years omitted: codes 091-093]
Unspecified 099

General Certificate Secondary Education
[Specific years omitted: codes 101-103]
Unspecified 109

Probationary training school
[Specific years omitted: codes 111-113]
Unspecified 119

Higher education (University, Institutes, Elite schools)
[Specific years omitted: codes 121-128]
Unspecified 129

Non declared education
[Specific years omitted: codes 999]
Etc. 999

Legibly write on the dotted line corresponding to the last class attended by the surveyed person followed by the order number

[Examples omitted]

26. Highest diploma
Q. What is the highest diploma you've ever/ _______ has ever obtained?

The terms for this variable are:
-No diploma/no certificate
-CEPE/Study of Elementary school certificate (CEP)/First School Leaving Certificate (FSLC)
-Diploma of local counselor/instructor (DMI)
-Exam at the end of the first stage of secondary education (BEPC)/certificate (CAP)/General Certificate of Education -Ordinary Level (GCE O-Level)/BE (Certificate of elementary education)/Royal Society of Arts/ City and Guides
-Probation/Certificate of Technical Education
-High school diploma/General Certificate of Education-A-Level (GCE A-Level)/Ordinary National Diploma (OND);
-Two year college degree/Two year technical degree (BTS)/University diploma of technology (DUT)
-Bachelor's degree/Civil engineer/1st Degree, Bachelor of Science (BSc), B.A./Engineer
-PhD
-Master's
-Post graduate diploma (DEA)/Specialized post graduate degree, specialized (DESS)/Ing.de conception/Master's degree/Masters of Science, Mast of Arts (MSc, MA)
-3rd Cycle doctorate, Master of Philosophy

-Ask the interviewee the highest diploma of the surveyed people while paying attention to the registration order
-Legibly write on the dotted line corresponding the highest diploma declared

Questions (Questions 27-33) related to the economic activity are only ask to people 6 years old and older

27. Profession
The profession is a job that can only be done by a person with the required knowledge, generally conferred through a diploma or a training certificate: the diploma designates the type of work accomplished by an individual at in a given position.
Q. What type of work did you/did _____ learn to do?

If someone says they have never learned a vocation:
-Ask him what he knows how to do?
-Write legibly on the dotted line the declared profession

28. Activity
This variable allows you to learn if a person worked over the course of the 7 days before your first visit to the household. In other words, the week of reference is determined by the date of your first visit in the household. This means that you count 7 days back starting with the day of your first visit; and these are the 7 days that correspond to the reference week (1 week in this specific case equals 7 days).

[Example omitted]

Q. What was your activity/what was the activity of ______ over the last 7 days.

The terms of this variable are:
01 = At work: This is the situation of a person who worked at a job over the last 7 days before your first visit to the household, whether the work was compensated or not. You must note that all the people on vacation are part of this group.
[Examples omitted]
02 = Unemployed, having already worked: This is the situation of a person who has already worked at least once but did not have a job over the course of the last 7 days and who is looking for a job
03 = Looking for work for the first time: This is a situation where the person who never had a job is looking for their first job
04 = Housewife: These are all people who are exclusively looking after the household and household work, without getting a salary and without looking for work
05 = Student: These are people who regularly go to an educational establishment and who are not engaged in economic activity
06 = Person of independent means: These are people who do not work and who live exclusively off of revenue from their property of their capital.
07 = Retiree: This is an individual who no longer works and who has a retiree's pension
08 = Old person: This is an aging person who doesn't have independent means and isn't a retiree, who does not work and who is no longer looking for work and who lives off of financial assistance and the finances of a relative
09 = Handicapped: This is a person cannot work because of his handicap
10 = Idle: This is a person without work, capable of work, but not looking for a job

The codes of the terms of this variable are:
01 = worked
02 = didn't work, is looking for a job but already worked in his life
03 = didn't work, looking for a job, never worked before
04 = didn't work, housewife who is not looking for a job
05 = didn't work, student (not looking for work)
06 = didn't work, person of independent means not looking for work
07 = didn't' work, retiree not looking for work
08 = didn't work, can't work or can't work anymore because of age, old person
09 = didn't work, can't work or can't work anymore because of his handicap or because of his illness, handicap
10 = didn't work, doesn't want to work and isn't looking for work

Following the order number:
-Legibly write on the dotted line corresponding to the registration order number of the surveyed person the situation of activity
-Mark the corresponding code in the reserved space

N.B. If the code is above 02, go to Q34.
If the code of the answer to question 28 (Activity) is equal to 01 (at work) or 02 (doesn't work, is looking for work and has already worked), first ask Q30 (work) then Q29 (Employment status), then Q31 (type of employment), Q32 (employment sector) and Q33 (Branch of business).

29. Employment status
The status of employment, which is related to the worker's situation related to his colleagues (if he has any) in the company, is a way of categorizing the engaged active population.

The codes of the terms of employment status are:
1-Permanent salaried: This is a person who works for a public or private employer and who receives regular compensation in kind or in cash.
2-Temporary salaried: This is a person who works intermittently for a public or private employers and who receives compensation in cash or in kind.
3-An employer is a person who has his own economic enterprise and who a salaried labor force
4-Independent-This is a person who works for himself and doesn't use any salaried labor force. He can use several uncompensated family helpers or apprentices
5-Family helper-This is a person who works in a family business without compensation
6-Compensated apprentice-This is a person who is learning a trade and who recipes compensation in cash or in kind.
7-Uncompensated apprentice-This is a person who is learning a trade and who does not receive any type of compensation
Q29: What is/was the employment status of ________ in his job/his last job?
-Mark in the proper space the code for the employment status of the surveyed person.

30. Employment
Employment is the regular activity done by the surveyed person over the course of the last 7 days preceding the survey agent's visit to the household.

Q30. For those who worked during the reference week: What job did ______ do? For those without employment already having worked: What was ______'s last job?

Following the registration order:
Legibly write the employment declared on the dotted line corresponding to the registration order of the surveyed person.

NB. Clearly mark the nature of the job that the person did during the reference week or that the person did before ending up unemployed.

[Examples omitted]
NB. Avoid vague responses like:
-Farmer for all those who farm
-Engineer for all engineers
-Government employee for all those employed by the government or the State

31. Type of employment
The variable "Type of Employment" is about the nature of the job or the trade practiced during the last 7 days preceding the survey agent's visit to the household. It is based off of the different types of employment on the job market while taking into account the effective legislation of Cameroon, and thus we can distinguish the modern contractual jobs, the freelance jobs, and the "atypical" jobs. The contractual types of jobs are those occupied by salaried people, in general in the modern sector. The freelance jobs are those held by intellectual or by established professionals. The atypical jobs are all those jobs that do not fit into either of the preceding categories. We could adopt for the "type of employment" variable the following different terms, defined as:

1 = Modern freelance job
2 = Job from a contract written for an undetermined amount of time
3 = Job from a contract written for a specific amount of time
4 = Entry level job, resulting from a trial contract
5 = Permanent job, resulting from no contract, oral or verbal (a manual position in the artisan, agricultural, breeder, etc. domain)
6 = Temporary job, resulting from a simple verbal agreement between two parties
7 = Seasonal job (agriculture or traditional breeder)
8 = Occasional job which is unstable (activity in an informal sector that doesn't require any type of qualifications or any significant commitment)
-Ask the type of employment done by the surveyed person (you can orient the person by reading the terms below to him)
-Mark in the indicated space the code of the type of employment cited

32. Employment sector
This is regarding the part of the economy where the job is performed, meaning formal or informal. In the formal sector, the management is characterized by the record keeping, having some type of taxpayers/ratepayers, etc employed. It groups together, aside from public administrations (public services), public and semipublic businesses, private businesses, jobs in international organizations, nongovernmental organizations (NGO), scholarly establishments…It is about employments in structured businesses.

The informal sector groups together activities lead by businesses and production units, individual or familial in nature in the artisanal, small business, manufacturing, or small service sectors.

[Example omitted]

NB. The informal sector does not include agriculture, breeding, fishing, hunting or harvesting. To collect the data on this variable, the following terms have been retained:

1 = Modern sector
2 = Informal sector of artisanal production
3 = Informal sector of public building and works
4 = Informal mechanical and repairs sector
5 = Informal sector of communication and transportation
6 = Informal sector of small businesses of manufactured products
7 = Informal sector of commodity food sales and catering
8 = Informal sector of personal services
9 = Traditional types of activities of agriculture, breeding, hunting, fishing, and forest
-Ask the person to succinctly describe the nature of the work as well as the location of the business or the establishment where he works or worked
-Determine the employment sector based on this response obtained
-Mark in the space reserved the code of the employment sector

[Examples omitted]

33. Business sector
The business sector corresponds to the establishment or the firm where the person worked for the 7 days before the visit from the surveying agent in the household. It is also about the people without work already having worked (code 02 of Q28), of the last business sector in which they worked.

Q. What does the enterprise in which you/ ______ work or worked?
-Legibly write the business sector declared on the corresponding dotted line.
-For salaried individuals, clearly write the name of the firm, company, the employer, or the service of the surveyed person.

[Examples omitted]

Attention: In certain situations, a domestic or house servant (cook, chauffeur, gardener, etc) can be in the service of a high level individual (Governors, Director of a semipublic or private company, President of the Administrative Counsel, Prefect, Sub prefect/District Head or all other high positions of the State) all while being paid by the employer or company which employees this high level individual. In this case, the person is not a household employee, but a salaried employee of that employer or of that company. For the category of this personnel, mark the name of the employer or the company.

[Examples omitted]

For salaried individuals of the public administration and of public administrative establishments, mark the name of the Minister or of the establishment for which the person worked.

[Example omitted]

For the Health and Social action sectors, do not mark the name of the health facility or the establishment. Instead, reference the following terms.

Example 4:
-Hospital activities for people working or having worked in a health facility (hospital, health center, etc)
-Medical or dental practice (dentist's office, doctor's office, etc)
-Activities of a traditional healer
-Activities of GIC Health for people working or having worked a communal health interest group
-Activities for human health not otherwise classified
-Veterinary activities for people working or having worked on animal health (veterinary pharmacies, veterinary clinics,…)
-Social action for people working or having worked in orphanages, community center for children or distressed individuals, boarding house (nursing home, etc)

NB. This is regarding the current businesses sector for the people who worked during the seven days before the survey agent's visit to the household, and the last business sector for people without work but who have already worked.
-Do not mark vague descriptions like "Ets BABA". Insist to find out what the BABA establishment does specifically.

34. Woman's name and number of live born children

Live births
Live births means all products of conception which, after expulsion or extraction from the mother's body, shows any sign of life, like crying, tears, breathing, heartbeat, motility, even if it only lived a few minutes after birth.
-Write down the name of the each woman age 12 or older respecting the order number of the registration rank of the first page of the questionnaire.

[Example omitted]

Q: Did ______ deliver a live baby?
If the answer is no:
-Mark in the reserved space 00 for the male sex and 00 for the female sex in Q. 34 and Q35

If the answer is yes:
-Ask the number of male births and the number of female births;
-Mark the number of children of male sex and the number of children of female sex declared in the reserved space.

35. Survival of children or number of children still alive, by sex.
Q. "Of all these children, how many boys are still live? And how many girls are still alive?"
-Mark the number given in the reserved space.

N.B: The part of the Standard Household Questionnaire (QMO) "Live births in the last 12 months" becomes "Women age 12 or older".
The last 12 months are counted starting with the reference night, meaning beginning on the night before your visit to the household.

36. Number of live births in the last 12 months (by women age 12 and older)
This question has undergone serious changes, thus you should strictly adhere to the following new instructions on how to ask the questions and mark the responses provided.
a) To start,
-Disregard the following mentions which are on the questionnaire in each of the 6 columns, these are:
Birth 1, Birth 2, Birth 3, etc.
Name of the child, etc.
b) Each of these 6 columns is now reserved for the collection of date related to the live births of a woman aged 12 years or older having occurred over the course of the last 12 months. As such, one column, questions Q34 and Q 35, are not recorded: Q34=Empty and Q35=Empty, if that means that each column is reserved to the recording of the data related to a man or to a young girl who is less than 12 years old: check the accuracy of this situation. If it is true, then leave Q36 also "Empty". If it's false, proceed to make the necessary corrections, then follow the following instructions since you are dealing with a woman who is 12 years or older.

c) The individual is a woman age 12 and older. Questions Q34 and Q35 are recorded. If Q34 if empty and Q35 if empty, that means that we recorded the data related to the number of live born children and the number of children still alive that a woman aged 12 and up has already had. Under these conditions, you must ask this woman Q36, the following question:
Q. Did you/did _____ have any live births over the period of time between November _____ 2005 and November ______ 2005?

If: Q34=Q35=00, this woman never had live born children over the course of her life, consequently over the course of the last 12 months she didn't have any live births; nevertheless, ask her the same question in the formation that follows:
-Do you confirm that you never had any live births over the course of the last 12 months?

If the answer is Yes, then:
-Mark "0" in each small space facing the "M" and "F" which symbolize the sex of the children who would be live born over the course of the last 12 months, in the column reserved for the recording of the date about this woman.

If the answer is No, meaning that the woman claimed to have had one live birth over the course of the last 12 months, ask her this question:
Q. Where is this child?

If there is confirmation that the child was live born over the course of the last 12 months, then,
-Ask her the sex of this child and mark "1" in one of the cells facing the "M" or "F" for the sex of the child.
-Remember that there is an inaccuracy regarding the answers obtained before Q34 and Q35; given the new data, make the necessary corrections.

If: Q34 "M" > 00 and/or Q34 "F" > 00, this woman has already had live born children over the course of her life; as her the following question:
-Among the "n" male children that you have had, how many were born over the course of the last 12 months?

If the response obtained is a number less than or equal to Q34 "M", then
-Mark this number in Q36 in the small cell facing the "M" in the column reserved for the recording of dad related to this woman;

-Among the "n" female children that you have, how many were born over the course of the last 12 months?

If the response obtained is a number less than or equal to Q34 "F", then
-Mark this number in Q36 in the small cell facing the "F" in the column reserved for the recording of data related to this woman.

N.B: The children less than one year old recorded as member of the household and whose mothers do not live in the household (because of death or departure) will not be counted in the events of the last 12 months.

Example of a case of a single birth: [Example omitted]

Example of a case of a multiple birth: [Example omitted]

Filling out the Standard Household Questionnaire for the women in household 01 of structure 074
[Table omitted]

Subdivision 3: Deaths in the last 12 months

Questions on deaths are extremely important and for these questions, it is difficult to get exact data if you aren't tactful. Some people can neglect to mention children that were born very young, which is why if the answer is NO, it is important to insist by saying "no boy or girls who cried or who showed any sign of life but only lived a few minutes, a few hours, or a few days?"

Similarly, some people are not inclined to talk about this subject and can become sad or overwhelmed when you ask them such questions. In these situations, you must show sympathy and tact. Say that you know that the subject is painful but that the information is important.

N.B: Deaths in the last 12 months are counted starting with the night of reference, meaning starting with the night before your first visit to the household.

37-Name of deceased, sex, and date of death
Q. Where there any deaths in the household between November _____ 2004 and November _____ 2005?

If there were deaths over the course of the last 12 months (period of reference),
-Mark the name of the deceased, the sex (1=male, 2=female), the month of death and the ask the following question.

Q. Where there any other deaths in the household over the course of the last 12 months?
-Mark the names of the deceased on the dotted line of the reserved columns.
-Ask the sex of the deceased (1=male, 2=female)
-Ask the date of death and mark the month and the year of death in the month and year column without specifying the date of death.

If the answer is no,
-Go to question 41

38. Age of deceased

Q. How old was ____ when he/she died?
-Write the name of each deceased person on the dotted lines in the same order as question 37.
-Mark the age at death of each person deceased in the reserved spaced, keeping to the right.

N.B: The live births that occurred during the period of reference followed by the deaths are recorded in Q36 (Live births in the last 12 months) and in subdivision 3 (Deaths in the last 12 months).

39. Cause of death

In the International Statistical Classification of Diseases, Injuries, and Causes of Death (ICD, 10th revision, Geneva, 1992):
1. Causes of death are defined as "All illnesses, morbid conditions, traumas that ended in or contributed to death and the circumstances of accidents or of violence that lead to lethal trauma."
2. Initial cause of death is "The illness or the trauma that led to the evolution of the morbidity leading directly to the death, or the circumstance of the accident or violence that led to accidental lethal trauma."
3. Maternal death is defined as: "the death of a women occurring during pregnancy or during the 42 days after it's termination, regardless of the length and the location, for any cause determined or aggravated by the pregnancy or the care that the pregnancy required, but not accidently or occurring by chance."

In certain environments, expect to receive vague unsatisfactory responses like "short illness", "his uncle cast a spell on him", "he died without illness", "he was bewitched by his grandfather", "he met the devil on the way", etc. What to do in these situations? Do not insist too much, because the simple mention of the recent death of a close relative is the source of relatively painful memories, which could bother the individual after the interview. Obtain the information that was given to you and continue with your work.

Q. What did he die of?
-Legibly write on the dotted line corresponding to the registration of the surveyed person's the cause of death.

40. Deaths after at least 3 months of incapacitating illness over the course of the last 12 months.
-HIV/AIDS

N.B: The question on the death of a member(s) of the household after at least 3 months of incapacitating illness over the course of the last 12 months is only asked to the head of household or to his representative, and only when there was at least one death in the household.

If there was one death:
-Ask the following question;
Q. Did ______ die after at least three months of incapacitating illness?
-Mark the in indicated space the code for the answer (1=Yes, 2=No)

If there were several deaths in the household,
-Ask the following question:

Q. Among the deceased, was there a person who died after at least three months of an incapacitating illness?

41. Knowledge of HIV/AIDS

N.B: The question on the knowledge of HIV/AIDS is only asked to resident members of the household who help with the interview, mainly to the women aged 12 and up and to the men aged 15 and up. The people living there who are not helping with the interview will not be questioned on this subject.

Q. Have you ever heard of HIV/AIDS?
-Mark in the proper space the answer (1=Yes, 2=No).

If the answer is no,
-Go to question 42

42. Knowledge of transmission of HIV/AIDS
N.B: The question on the knowledge of the transmission of HIV/AIDS is only asked to the female residents present aged 12 and up, and to the male residents aged 15 and up.
The codes for the terms of this variable are:
01-sexual transmission
02-blood transfusion
04-from mother to child
08-use of dirty instruments
16-Don't know

Q. What modes of transmission of HIV/AIDS do you know of?
-Mark in the space indicated while respecting the order or the registration column of the surveyed person, the code of knowledge of transmission of HIV/AIDS.

N.B: Don't forget that the people mentioned at the top of the page are the individuals in the household deceased in the last 12 months.

Subdivision4: Departures from Cameroon starting January 1st 2000 until 2005.

The people who left Cameroon since January 1 2005, who spent time abroad and who then moved back to Cameroon during the same period of time are not included, and thus do not need to be registered in this subdivision. Similarly, all those people who left on a trip or an internship for less than 6 months do not need to be registered.

NB. The years of departure mentioned in the Standard Household Questionnaire (1998 and 1999) are no longer valid. You must henceforth consider January 1 2000 as the date of reference of departure of emigrants.
Consequently, the years of departure are 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, and 2005.

43. Name of emigrant, sex, and year of departure.
By emigrant, we mean all those who left Cameroon to move abroad and who never came back.

Q. Are there any people in the household who left Cameroon to go abroad since January 1 2000 and who are still overseas or who will be there for more than 6 months?

If the answer to this question is yes:
-Mark the name/names of the emigrant(s) on the dotted line in the reserved column;
-Ask the sex of emigrants and mark the corresponding code in the indicated space (1=male, 2=female)
-Ask the year of departure and mark it on the dotted line.

NB: A person who moved to Europe since January 1 2005 should be registered in this subdivision, even if she came back to spend vacations in Cameroon.

[Examples omitted]

If the answer is no:
-Go to Q. 47

44. Age at departure
Q. How old was _____ when he left Cameroon?
-Mark on the left the age provided (in years passed) in the reserved space.

45. Country of destination
Q. What country did _____ go to ? (This is about the first country)
-Report on the dotted lines and in the same order as Q43 the names of the emigrants surveyed in the household.
-Mark the name of the country of destination on the dotted line corresponding to the registration order of each emigrant.

46. Main reason for leaving
Q.: Why did he/she leave Cameroon?
-Ask the main reason for the departure of the emigrant.
-Mark in the space provided the code for the main reason for the emigrant's departure provided by the respondent.

The codes for terms for the main reason for leaving are:
1-studies
2-looking for work
3-work
4-marriage
5-rejoining family members
6-health evacuation
7-family conflicts
8-other
9-Don't know

Subdivision 5: Housing characteristics

This subdivision provides information on the characteristics of the dwelling of the households. The answers to the questions that follow are only the Questionnaire number 01 used in the household.

47. Type of structure
The codes for the terms of this variable are:
1-Freestanding house
2-Modern villa
3-House with several accommodations
4-Building with several apartments
5-Religious building
6-Other to specify

48. Main material of walls
The codes for the terms of this variable are:
1-Contrete/cinder block/bricks
2-cut stone
3-simple bricks
4-boards
5-clay/adobe
6-carabot (plywood)
7-Other to specify

49. Main material of roof
The codes of the terms for this variable are:
1-Sheet metal
2-cement
3-straw/thatch
4-tiles
5-earth
6-Other to specify

50. Main material of floor
The codes of the terms for this variable are:
1-cement
2-tiles
3-wood
4-earth
5-marble
6-other to specify
-Mark in the space indicated the codes corresponding to the answer.

51. Type of toilet
Q. What type of toilet is available in this dwelling?

The codes of the terms for this variable are:
1-inside toilet with flush
2-private outside toilet with flush
3-communal toilet with flush
4-private latrines
5-communal latrines
6-open air
7-other to specify

52. Number of bedrooms in the dwelling
This is about the number of rooms regularly used for sleeping. In some cases, a living room or a kitchen might be considered a bedroom if certain members of the household spend their nights there.
Q. How many bedrooms are in your dwelling?
-Circle the code corresponding to the answer.

53. Occupation status of dwelling
The codes of the terms for this variable are:
1-Owner
2-Lease
3-Rent to own
4-Lodged by employer
5-Loged by relatives/friends
6-Other to specify
Q. Does this dwelling belong to the household or is it rented?
-Mark in the indicated space the code corresponding to the answer of the surveyed person

54. Main method of lighting
1-Electricity
2-Gas
3-Hurricane lamp
4-Shavings/sawdust
5-Burning wood/coal/charcoal
6-Other to specify
Q. What is the main method of lighting in this dwelling?
-Mark in the indicated space the code corresponding to the answer of the surveyed person

55. Main source of energy for the kitchen
The codes of the terms for this variable are:
1-Electricity
2-Gas
3-Oil
4-Shavings/sawdust
5-Burning wood/coal/charcoal
6-Other to specify
Q. What type of fuel do you most often use to cook?
-Mark in the indicated space the code corresponding to the answer of the surveyed person

56. Main source of drinking water.
The codes of the terms for this variable are:
01-Interior faucet
02-exterior faucet
03-Fixed up well
04-Simple well
05-Paid public fountain
06-stream/river/marshland
07-drilling
08-mineral water
09-fixed up spring
10-Simple spring
11-lake/pond/swamp
12-other to specify

NB: Ask for the origins of the water purchased and record the appropriate term.
Q. Where do you get your drinking water from?
-Mark in the proper space the code corresponding to the response provided.

57. Mode of evacuating used water
The codes of the terms for this variable are:
1-septic pit
2-courtyard
3-street
4-bushes
5-river/stream
6-other to specify
Q. Where do you dump used water?
-Mark in the proper space the code corresponding to the response provided.

58. Mode of evacuating household waste
The codes of the terms for this variable are:
1-street
2-public receptacle
3-bushes
4-river/stream
5-burial
6-surrounding/nearby the house
7-brun
8- other to specify
Q. Where do you throw away your trash?
-Mark in the proper space the code corresponding to the response provided.

59. Settlement site
The settlement site is the precise location where the structure housing the household is built. It consists of two elements: the topography and the environmental risks.

The codes of the terms for this variable are:

01-Equiped mountainside: the site of the slope having benefited from development of the building site (Roads System and Public Utilities: Roads, gutters, sewers…) and build according to urban standards.
02-Unequiped mountainside: the site of the slope of the dwellings were constructed in an unregulated manner
03-Shoal: the settlement site is in a valley without any water connection, but presenting risks of flooding by rainwater.
04-Swampy shoal: the settlement site is in a valley with water flow or with a swamp and presenting an elevated risk of flooding
05-Flat zone: settlement site is flat which can present with a risk of flooding during rainy season or by floodwaters; example, flooded plains
06-Peak/summit: settlement site on a hill or a mountain presenting a risk of collapse/fallen rock
07-Near petroleum warehouses: the settlement site if around petroleum warehouses and presents risks in case of fire; example, around cisterns, around gas stations, etc.
08-Near polluting factories: settlement site is close to factories producing liquid, gaseous, or solid toxic waste. Example: chemical industries, refineries, metallurgic industries, and sawmills
09-Near airport: settlement site is inside the security limits of an airport
10- Near a railway: the settlement site is close to rails and presents risks in the event of a train accident.
11-Drains: Settlement site is close to equipment that channels water and stream and presents a flood risk related to the overflow of water
12-Near mountain or volcanoes
13-Near high-tension power cables
14-Other: All other settlement sites presenting no risk
-Mark in the proper space the code of the response (resulting from your evaluation)

60: Main road access to dwelling
This is about the road the most frequently used to get to the dwelling of the head of household.
-Do not ask this question to members of the household

The codes for the terms for this variable are:
1-Asphalt road
2-Earth road
3-trail
4-path
5-other to specify
-Mark in the proper space the code for the response resulting from your observation

Section 2: Counting strategy for nomads/travelers, individuals without definite homes (homeless), non-mapped sites, and agricultural households

The format of the Nomad and Homeless Questionnaires are horizontal. The characteristics for each person surveyed are transcribed in the columns on the same horizontal line. This presentation allows us to record a large number of individuals on the same page.

The Nomad and Homeless Questionnaires are composed of a limited number of variables related to characteristics of identification of the household and of individual characteristics of individual members of the household.

2.1 Counting strategy for nomads/travelers

The nomads are the populations whose way of life is characterized by frequent displacement. These displacements, designated as "migration," are conducted according to seasons and are driven by a search for water and zones with pastures for the nomads who do breeding. These movements are generally followed by a return to the location from where the individuals left; they live in groups which are not attached to one territorial region and they displace themselves permanently.

In Cameroon, non-fixed pygmy populations identify themselves similarly to this category of population, where the common characteristic is mobility and regrouping en temporary camps with a precarious living situation.

The Controller and the team leader need to investigate to know the location of the nomad camps. To do this, you need to make contact with all people who are resources (traditional authorities) and all institutions (veterinary services and breeder services) having a complete knowledge of the nomad populations (these activities will be developed during the training of the personnel of the terrain).

There are several observation strategies for the nomad populations. The zone counting method which lends itself to the classic counting method is the one applied to nomad populations whose migratory movement is followed by a return to the location of habitual residence. The survey agent or the team leader should proceed in the same manner as during the counting of standard household populations.
-In this case, administer the Standard Household Questionnaire in the nomad household.
-Specify on the first page of the Questionnaire (on top at the far right) that this is a nomad household by indicating "Nomad Household".
-Similarly, regardless of where you identify the nomad household, the presence of a woman in the household implies the usage of the Standard Household Questionnaire.
-On the other hand, if you only find men and their herd at the nomad camp without the presence of a woman, you should administer the Nomad Questionnaire.

2.2 Instructions for filling out the questionnaire for nomads/travelers

The identification variables provide the information allowing us to identify the nomad households and to locate the counting zone. The variables relate to: the province, the department, the quarter, the city/canton, the neighborhood/village, the bloc/town, the counting zone and the number of the household.

The other variables of the same rubric give the information on the summary of the surveyed nomads and the terrain agents (Team leader and controller).

The registration of the data related to the identification variables must be done before the beginning of the interview.

Province
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the province you're in.
Department
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the department you're in.
Quarter/district
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the quarter/district you're in.
Canton/city
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the canton (administrative district) you're in.
Village/Neighborhood of city
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the village you're in.
Town/Block
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the town/block you're in.
Counting zone
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the counting zone you've been given.
Household number
-Mark in the reserved space the number you've appointed to the household you're in.

The other information to collect at the end are:

Total men
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the number of surveyed men after filling out the questionnaire.
Total women
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the number of surveyed women after filling out the questionnaire.

Team leader
-Legibly mark your first and last names in the appropriate space as team leader.
-Also mark the date of the interview
Controller
-As the controller, legibly mark your first and last names in the appropriate space. Also mark the date that you gave the questionnaire.
First and last names
-Legibly write the name of each person surveyed in the appointed space (for newborns who haven't received a name, register them under the name "Baby" followed by the first or last name of the mother)
Q1: Order number
The order number is pre-printed. You do not have write anything in this column.

Q2: Sex
-Consistently register the sex of each surveyed person by marking the corresponding code in the reserved space. If you have difficulty identifying the sex of the surveyed person, ask if this person is a boy/man or a girl/woman.
Q3. Family relationship in the household
(cf. instructions on filling out the Standard Household Questionnaire)
This is a relationship by marriage, blood, or adoption that units members of the household.

-For each surveyed person, register the family relationship in the household by writing the corresponding code in the reserved space (see code).
Q4. Age
(Cf. instructions on filling out the Standard Household Questionnaire)
The age of a person in years passed is the whole number of birthdays that this person had already celebrated. This is the age of the person when they celebrated their last birthday before the survey.

-Mark the age declared in the reserved space.
Q5. Place of birth
(Cf. instruction on filling out the Standard Household Questionnaire)

Q. What quarter/district was the surveyed person born in?
-Legibly write the code of the location of birth and mark above the spaces reserved for the codes the name of the current quarter for the people born in Cameroon and the name of the country for people born abroad.
Q6. Marital status
(Cf. Instructions on filling out the Standard Household Questionnaire)
The marital status is defined by the existence or lack thereof of conjugal links between two opposite sex people and who have complied with current laws or traditions.
Ask the question in the following way: Is ______x ______ married?

-Mark the code of the marital status in the reserved space (see code).

Attention: This question is only asked of men 15 years and older and of women 12 years and older.

Q7. Residential situation
-Mark the code corresponding to the residential status of the surveyed person in the reserved space (Cf. code).
Q8. Religion
Q. What is the surveyed person's religion?
-Mark the code corresponding to the religion of the surveyed person in the reserved space (Cf. code).
Q9. Education level
The surveyed person maybe never went to school (no level). He can also claim to have an elementary, high school, or university level education

-Mark the code corresponding to the education level of the surveyed person in the reserved space (see code).

Attention: This question is only asked of people aged 3 and up

Q10. Nationality
Q. What is your nationality?
-Mark CMR for all people with a Cameroonian nationality.
-For those with other nationalities, legibly write the name of the country.
-Mark the first nationality claimed for individuals who claim dual citizenship/nationality.
Q11. Main occupation
The main occupation corresponds to the main activity done by the surveyed person: agriculture, commerce, breeding, and other.

-Mark in the reserved space the code for the main occupation declared by the surveyed person (see code).

Attention: This question is only asked to people aged 6 or up.

2.3 Counting strategies for individuals without definite homes/homeless (SDFA)

What we mean by "homeless" (SDFA) is all persons who are not attached to a household, or who do not identify themselves as member of a standard or communal household. Homeless individuals are different from individuals who permanently live on the street and continue to maintain close relationships with their household/family. Homeless individuals who normally live in a group consider the street their dwelling. This is where they look for and find their shelter, their work, and their food.

The methods of approach and observation for homeless individuals are mostly based on a technique of empathy, which creates a climate of confidence between the survey agent and one or more group members. It thus requires a lot of time and is not recommended for surveys which need to be punctual.

A combination of the hierarchical approach and a grouping approach seem better adapted to the counting context.

The hierarchical approach allows the terrain personnel (survey agent or team leader) to successfully establish a preliminary contact with the group leader, who makes arrangements so that those he is in charge of can be surveyed.

The grouping approach is conducted at the homeless people's shelter in each counting zone and at their grouping during meal hours. To get in the group, you must take active measures to get to the largest number of individuals.

The combination of the two approaches results in a counting strategy of the homeless people; this is a procedure in four steps, as indicated below.

[Diagram omitted]

Plan 1: Counting strategies for homeless people
In a concentrated fashion, the terrain personnel (survey agent or team leader) will:
-Contact all resource people (administrative or traditional authorities) or all institutions working to supervise the homeless individuals (MINAS-Minister of Social Affairs, MINJE-Minister of Youth and Sport, NGOs…) in their intervention zone to obtain from them useful information to complete the task).
-Locate in each zone all the "structures" (market, train station, abandoned building, sports or theater facility) that may shelter homeless individuals.
-Identify, using the support of the resource people, the group leaders who can help you get information as well as help with the counting of other members of different groups.
-Regroup the members of groups and proceed to their surveying/counting while working hard to complete the collection in one evening.
-Identify and count the homeless people living alone by including them if possible to a group close to their shelter.

2.4 Instructions for filling out the questionnaire for individuals without definite homes/homeless (SDFA)

The identification variables provide the information allowing us to locate the counting zone where the homeless individuals were surveyed. These variables are related to the province, the department, the quarter/district, the city/canton (administrative district), the block/town, and the counting zone. The other variables of the Questionnaire are related to the characteristics of the individuals.

Fill out the identification variables before the beginning of the interview, following the following instructions:

Province
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the province you're in.
Department
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the department you're in.
Quarter/district
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the quarter/district you're in.
Canton/city
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the canton (administrative district) you're in.
Village/Neighborhood of city
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the village you're in.
Town/Block
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the town/block you're in.
Counting zone
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the counting zone you've been given.

Total men
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the number of surveyed men after filling out the questionnaire.

Total women
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the number of surveyed women after filling out the questionnaire.

Team leader
-Legibly mark your first and last names in the appropriate spot as team leader.
-Also mark the date of the interview

Controller
-As the controller, legibly mark your first and last names in the appropriate space. Also mark the date that you gave the questionnaire.

First and last names
-Legibly write the name of each person surveyed in the appointed place (for newborns who haven't received a name, register them under the name "Baby" followed by the first or last name of the mother)

Q1: Order number
The order number is pre-printed. You do not have write anything in this column.

Q2: Sex
-Consistently register the sex of each surveyed person by marking the corresponding code in the reserved space. If you have difficulty identifying the sex of the surveyed person, ask if this person is a boy/man or a girl/woman.

Q3. Age
-Mark the age declared in the reserved space (Cf. Q6 of the Standard Household Questionnaire, see page 19 and 20).

Q4. Place of birth
Which quarter/district was the surveyed person born in (for people born in Cameroon) or in what country was the surveyed person born in (for those born abroad)?
-Mark above the spaces reserved for the registration the codes of the name of the current quarter/district for people born in Cameroon and the name of the country for people born abroad.

Q5. Survival of father
We would like to know if the father of the surveyed person is still alive. For this question, the respondent must specific yes or no if the father of the surveyed person is still alive.
-Mark the code corresponding to the answer provided in the reserved space. If the response to this question is No (2) or Don't know (3), go directly to Q7.

Q6. Location of residence of the father
What quarter/district does the father of the surveyed person (if the father lives in Cameroon) or what country (if he lives abroad) live in?
-Mark the code of the location of residence (1=urban, 2=rural)
-Mark above the spaces reserved for the registration the codes of the name of the current quarter/district for the fathers living in Cameroon and the name of the country for fathers living abroad.

Q7 Survival of the mother
We would like to know if the mother of the surveyed person is still alive.
-Mark the code corresponding to the answer provided in the reserved space. If the response to this question is No (2) or Don't know (3), go directly to Q9.

Q8. Location of residence of the mother
What quarter/district does the mother of the surveyed person (if the mother lives in Cameroon) or what country (if she lives abroad) live in?
-Mark the code of the location of residence (1=urban, 2=rural)
-Mark above the spaces reserved for the registration the codes of the name of the current quarter/district for the mothers living in Cameroon and the name of the country for mothers living abroad.

Q9. Education level
Attention: This question is only asked to people who are aged 3 and up.
The surveyed person maybe never went to school (no level). He can also claim to have an elementary, high school, or university level education
-Mark the code corresponding to the education level of the surveyed person in the reserved space (see code).

Q10. Location of sleeping arrangements
The location of the sleeping arrangements is the place where one can find the homeless individual. The codes for locations likely to shelter homeless people are:
1-markets
2-bus or train station
3-abandoned building
4-sports or theater facility
5-launderette
6-parking garages
7-abandoned garages or vehicles
8-tunnels or bridges
9-others to specify
-Mark the code of the location of sleeping arrangements of the surveyed person in the reserved space.

Q11. Main reason for being on the street
The main reason for being on the street for a homeless individual is the main motivation that justifies his abandonment of society. The codes for the main reason for being on the street are:
1-Search for freedom
2-violence of relatives
3-loss of parents (orphan)
4-divorce of parents
5-homelessness of parents
6-bad company
7-abadonment of education
9-other to specify
Mark the code corresponding to the response in the reserved space.


2.5 Counting strategy for populations from sites not on the maps

In the absence of a complete map of certain inhabited sites of the national territory, there was a systematic sweep of the said sites during the counting. This process consisted of surveying all the populations in these zones during the main counting. At the same time, the evaluation of the workload remains a pressing necessity. To do this, the team leader turns to the administrative and traditional authorities. The strategy to adopt consists of:
-Creating a list of the villages and the town in each administrative unit.
-Comparing the list of locations provided by the National Coordination with the list obtained from the administrative authorities
-Eventually identifying the village or the towns that aren't covered by the maps
-Attach each of these unmapped villages or towns to a team zone
-Redeploy the survey agents in the unmapped villages or towns
-Have the survey agents consistently sweep the areas (numbering and counting the structures)

The procedure can be diagramed as such:
[Diagram omitted]

Plan 2: Counting strategy for populations in unmapped zones.

2.6 Counting strategy for agricultural households

Definition: The agricultural household is a household whose head of household or a member of the household is farmer. A farmer is a person, man or woman, who does farming activities or breeding on his own farm (field, plantation, farm, fish farming pond, livestock, etc) as an independent worker, with the active participation of family members or as an employer.

There are two practical ways to identify a head of household who is a farmer:
1. The head of household is an agricultural worker (in the wider sense) whose employment status is "employer", being "independent" and the business sector is "agriculture", "breeding", "poultry farming", "beekeeping", "horticulture", "fish breeding", or "forestry".
2. The head of household who is an employed person, didn't list himself as such on the questionnaire, ask him the following question:

Q. Are you the owner of a farm?
If the answer is yes, then he is a farmer.

2.7 Instructions for filling out the sheet for agricultural households

The identification variables provide the information allowing us to locate the counting zone where farmers were surveyed. These variables relate to the province, the department, the quarter, the city/canton, the neighborhood/village, the bloc/town, the counting zone and the structure and the number of the household.

Fill out the identification variables before the beginning of the interview, following the following instructions:

Province
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the province you're in.
Department
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the department you're in.
Quarter/district
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the quarter/district you're in.
Canton/city
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the canton (administrative district) you're in.
Village/Neighborhood of city
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the village you're in.
Town/Block
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the town/block you're in.
Counting zone
-Mark in the reserved space the code of the counting zone you've been given.
Structure number
Mark in the reserved space the number of the structure you're in

Household number
Mark in the reserved space the number of the household you're in.
1. Is the head of household a farmer?
-Mark in the reserved spaces code 1 if yes and 2 if no.

If the answer is yes, go to question 3

2. Is there are farmer in the household?
-Mark in the reserved spaces code 1 if yes and 2 if no.

If the answer is yes, go to question 3.

3. Number of farmers in the household?
-Mark the number of farmers in the household in the reserved spaces.
4. Order number of the farmers in the household
If the number of farmers in the household is higher than 6, classify them by their growing order number and keep only the first six. In other words, if there are more than six farmers, take the order number of the first six based on the registration order in the standard household questionnaire.

[Example and diagram omitted]

5. Main crop location
Here, main work is the main spot where the work takes place. In fact, a farm can have several activities and in different locations. Ask the farmer to indicate the main place of cultivation.

Q. What quarter/district or what country is your main crop location?
-Legibly write down the answer provided
-Then ask him if the location is a city or a village
-Mark in the space the code for the work location (1-urban, 2- rural)

NB. The main crop location is, for farmers in Cameroon, the quarter/district where they mainly cultivate.

6. Agricultural activities practiced
For each activity, ask if at least one of the farmers in the household engages in it. Only mark code "2" (which correspond to the answer "No") in the reserved space if no member questioned practices that particular agricultural activity. In the opposite situation, mark the code "1" (which corresponds to "yes")

NB. If a member of the household practices an agricultural activity that is not on the agricultural sheet, mark the activity in the place space after Q10. Create a space and mark the code 1 in this space.

Section 3: Instructions for filling out other documents

The other documents in the collection are made up of the sheet used to recognize structures, the sheet for the summary of the counting in the zones and the survey agent's notebook.

3.1 Instructions for filling out the sheet on identification of structures

The sheet used to recognize structures has two parts: the location of the counting zone and the table to recognize the structures.

Identification and location of counting zone
-Write out the names of the province, the department, the quarter/district where you are as well as their respective codes.
-Mark the number of the counting zone that you've been given.

The table on the sheet is made up of two columns:
1st column: Number of the structure
-Mark in this column the numbers of the structure that have 3 digits and that go from 001 to 999

2nd column: Type of structure
-Circle the code corresponding to the type of structure.

3rd column: Household number of the structure
-Mark the total number of households counted in the identified structure.

3.2 Instructions for filling out the sheet on summary of counting in the counting zone
The sheet for the summary of the counting in the zones in the ZD allow for preliminary counting results in each zone. It consists of identification and localization f the counting zone as well as its profile.

Identification and location of the counting zone

This information is already transcribed on the National Coordination sheet.

Counting zone profile

The name(s) of the village(s)/neighborhood(s) of the city are/were already marked on the sheet. This sheet is made up of empty cells in the first column which are reserved for recoding locations that were omitted or newly created.

If you discover an omitted or newly created location in a rural place,
-Mark it/them in the reserved cell(s), taking care to mention first the village that this location is attached to.

The name of the village must be put on the left and that of the locations must be put on the right, to respect the order.

[Example omitted]

In an urban location, it is possible to find a similar situation, so
-Follow the same instructions while remembering that you must pay attention to the locations of the blocks.

NB. Do not assign any code to the omitted or newly created location(s) or blocks.

To fill out columns 3, 4, 5.
-First begin with the counting, town by town or block by block, of all the questionnaire administered in the counting zone you've been given to record the corresponding numbers;
-Then mark on the left in columns 3, 4, and 5 respectively the number of households, the resident population of men and the resident population of women surveyed in each town/block.
-Add up the households in the counting zone and mark the result in the reserved space.
-Then add up, in lines and in columns, the resident population of men and the resident population of women.
-Mark the results in column 6 "Total" and on the line "Preliminary counting results in the counting zone"

At the end,
-Check the completeness and the consistency of the information, then write your first and last name as well as your observations in the reserved spaces.

3.3 Instructions for filling out the travel notebook of the surveying agent in the counting zone

The survey agent's notebook allows you to create a list of names of all the heads of household in each counting zone. This sheet, which you must fill out at the end of each workday, has two parts: the identification and location of the counting zone as well as the list of names of the heads of household of each counting zone.
-Fill it out at the same time as the sheet to recognize the structures.

Identification and location of the counting zone
-Mark the number of the counting zone
-Mark the codes for the province, department, quarter/district, city/canton in the reserved spaces.
-Mark the name of the village of the neighborhood of the city depending on whether you are in a rural area or an urban area.
-Then mark the name of the town or the block depending on whether you are in a rural area or an urban area.

If the counting zone is directly between two villages or two city neighborhoods or more
-Mark the names of said villages or neighborhood, separating them by a slanted line.

[Example omitted]

If the counting zone is made up of more than one town or block,
-Mark them respecting the order of progression on the terrain.

1st Column: Number of structure
-Mark the number of the structure. Remember that the numbers of the structures are 3 digit numbers. The first structure will have number 001, the second 002, the third 003, and so on.

2nd Column: Household number
-Mark the household number in the structure. The numbers of the household are numbers with 2 digits. Remember that the first household in the structure will have number 01, the second, 02, the third, 03, and so on.

3rd Column: First and last name of the head of household
-Write the first and last name of the head of household.

4th Column: Resident male population
-Mark on the right the number of male residents you counted in the household.

[Example omitted]

5th Column: Resident female population
-Mark on the right the number of female residents you counted in the household.

[Example omitted]

6th Column: Total resident population
This is about the total number of residents that you counted in the household.
-Add up the residents (men + women) and mark the result to the right.

7th Column: Visitors
-Mark to the right the number of male visitors and the number of female visitors you counted in the household.

[Example omitted]

At the end of each page,
-Add up the total of each column and
-Mark the result in the space "new report" on the next page.

NB The total on the last page you use in the counting zone must be the total added up in the entire counting zone.

[Text omitted, additional documents]
