MINNESOTA POPULATION CENTER, UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA
IPUMS-International

Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh
Ministry of Planning
Statistics Division
Enumerator's Training Manual
Population and Housing Census 2011

Bangladesh Bureau of Statictics
Parishankhan Bhaban
E-27/A, Agargaon
Sher-E-Bangla Nagar, Dhaka-1207

[Table of Contents have been omitted]
[p. 2]

SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS
- Enumerators and supervisors must keep their identity card with them.
- They must be acceptable well dressed.
- While arrived for enumeration be introduced with gentility and politely and describe your aim of arrival before collection of information.
- Take your necessary materials from zonal officer after having training.
- Every Enumerator/Supervisor should keep Enumeration Area Map with them.
- Don't use any other pencil without the supplied one.
- The supervisor must identify the enumeration areas with red pen in the map and hand over to every enumerator.
- After completion of enumeration maps will also be submitted along with all other materials.
- Be careful that no household is left from the census and no one is enumerated twice.
- A building may look like commercial establishment but there may live some one. You are to cheek it. Especially in the urban area each and every floor of the multistoried buildings must be cheeked and confirmed that no household or individual is left.
- At the beginning of enumeration work the supervisor must verify five filled in questionnaires. - - If all are found to be correct, the enumerator will be given instruction to go ahead; otherwise he will correct any mistakes.
- The supervisor will supervise the works of the enumerators working under his control everyday, make it sure that the enumeration works is going on correctly and will submit the progress report to the zonal officer everyday.
- If any Enumerator needs additional questionnaire books the supervisor will let it know the zonal officer collect it and supply to the enumerator rapidly.
- At the last day of enumeration the enumerator will cheek door to door of his enumeration area and make sure that no household is left and no one has been enumerated twice. If any household is found left he will cover it instantly.
- The instructions in the 1st and 2nd pages of the census book and back page of the tally sheet must be followed.

[p. 3]

INSTRUCTION
Assalamualikum

(At the beginning the zonal officer will take the attendance of the Enumerators and Supervisors)
I welcome you all in the training class of Population and Housing Census 2011. You might be aware that the up coming Fifth Population and Housing Census will be conducted in the country during 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19 March, 2011 in five days which are Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday respectively. To conduct the census all the mahallahs in the urban area and all the villages in the rural area have been divided into one or more enumeration areas. For each and every enumeration area a map has been prepared and easily identifiable roads, canals, rivers, ponds, ditch, mosque, temple, school, college, madrasa etc. have been shown in the map as land mark around the map and name of Household/ Educational Institutions have also been used as legend. The enumeration areas (EA) have been constituted with more or less 120 households and to enumerate the household, housing structures and individuals one enumerator has been appointment for each E.A. You gentleman who will work as enumerator and how you will perform the duties of enumeration perfectly visiting door to door all these things will bring out before you in this training class. In order to complete the enumeration accurately one supervisor has been appointed to supervise 6/7 enumerators so that none is left and none is counted twice in the census. The supervisors are also taking training with you in this training class. For each supervisor on Supervisor's Area Map has also been prepared. In the supervisor's map name of road, canal, river, ditch, pond, mosque, temple, school, college, madrasa, household head/institution etc. have been mentioned as legend. In this census every supervisor will work along with his enumerators as a team.
Now, I like to exchange my views with you on the fundamental six points on census and the training schedule.
1. Questionnaire: The first instrument in the census is questionnaire where the collected information will be entered. A questionnaire has been designed for Population and Housing Census 2011 where collected information will be entered. All of you look at the questionnaire. It has been formulated in such a way so that ICR machine can capture the data.

2. ICR: The abbreviation of ICR is Intelligent Character Recognition Machine. It is a modern OCR machine, The information written and entered in the questionnaire (such as 1, 2, 3) alphabet (such as B.T.D) and cross (() is directly possible to be captured in this machine.

3. Enumeration Area: It has been made sure after analyzing the past experience and verifying the field of work that within five days enumeration of 120 households is possible. Keeping this idea in view all the villages in the rural area and mahallahs in the urban area have been divided to constitute an enumeration area having more or less 120 households and enumerator has been appointment for each enumeration area.

4. Definition of Map: The physical features of the earth presented in a short paper is called map. In census map the legends like road, housing, lake, ditch, pond, river, school, college, and mosque, temple, crop field etc. land marks are shown. Maps are generally two types. (1) Scale based and (2) Non-scale based (Sketch map).

[p. 4]

In this census digital maps maintaining 1.5000 scale for urban area and 1.10000 scale for rural area have been prepared after having image from the air. In those maps identification boundary for mauza and within mauza villages and dividing villages enumeration areas have been clearly done for rural area. In urban area identification boundary for mahallah and dividing mahallah enumeration areas have been shown.

In practice it has found that identification of enumeration area boundary will not be easy due to small scaling of those maps. Considering the circumstances maps without scale i.e sketch map have been prepared to use during enumeration in the census.
Use of maps in the census to collect information and disseminate census data to the people is undoubtedly important.

5. Supervisor Area: In the census one supervisor to supervise the works of 6/7 enumerators closely and guide them to do enumeration work has been appointed. As such a supervisor area map combining 6/7 enumeration areas has also been prepared. Each and every enumeration area has been clearly identified in the supervisor's map using easily identifiable land marks a legend. Following this map the supervisors will identify the enumeration areas and handed over the responsibility of enumeration to the enumerators working under his control specifically. This map will be used in the census as a base map.

6. Training Schedule: A unique and identical verbatim training manual has been prepared to impart training to the enumerators and supervisors all over the country. A three-day long training will be imparted to you following this verbatim training manual strictly.
First Day: Use of enumeration area map will be taught and the supervisors along with the enumerators under his control will go to the field and using map enumeration area will be identified and handed over to the enumerators. If there happen any trouble to identify the enumeration area the supervisor and the enumerators will do the needful in the field and update the map using necessary landmarks as legends. If there is difficulty in the field please contact me in no time so that I can solve the problem immediately at the field.
Second Day: In the first half of the second day you will be taught in the class room how to fill out the questionnaire using the verbatim Training Manual and in the after noon session will be held on questions and answers and a mock training will also be materialized.
Third Day: On the third day of training there will be a field trip where questionnaire will be filled out in the field and coming back to the training class discussion and evaluation will be made on field experience.
At last filling out of Tally Sheet, discussion on the calendar of activities of the enumerator and supervisor and filling out the control forms will be taught.

[p. 5]

Chapter 1
Procedure for using of Census Maps:

At the beginning I am telling you that in this census the supervisors and the enumerators should use supervisor's maps and enumerator's map respectively. The aim of using map is that the supervisors will identify the enumeration area specifically and hand over to the enumerators under his control in such a way so that nobody is left out from the census and none is counted twice. We will use supervisor's area sketch map to make it easy for the enumerator in using the maps.
We all that is I myself, zonal officers and all of you will go to field now. The duty of the supervisors is to identify the enumeration areas and hand over to the concerned enumerators under his control at the field level. If there found no identification land marks around the enumeration area the Supervisor and the Enumerators will jointly update the map using legends and from Tuesday, the 15th instant the enumerator will enumerate all the houses, households and individuals using the enumeration area map. In no how the enumerator will enumerate any body out of the jurisdiction of the map and will left out some one from the census within the jurisdiction of the map. Remember that an independent group will come to remunerate this area just after few days of completion of this work and will check the quality of your work. If there found any mistakes its responsibilities will go to you.
Before going to the field I shall discuss in brief on the supervisor's map from a rural area and another supervisor's map from an urban area to have an over all idea on it. The maps for the supervisors have been prepared based on digital maps in this census. This map contains five parts such as (1) Title (2) Scale (3) Direction (4) Body of the map and (5) Legend. We shall discuss only on sketch map.

[the supervisor's maps have been omitted]
[p. 9]

1.3 Evaluation of Field Experience
(Coming back to the training class at 3:00 pm addressing every supervisor ask questions). Did you identify the areas of all of your Enumerators? If the answer is yes then ask any of the enumerators "Tell me the land marks you find arround the EA assigned to you" (If the answer is satisfaory verify the works of next superviors and if found not satisfactory ask the supervisor to go to field again and make identifiable his EAs today. Serialy ask every supervisor and at least one of their Enumeraor).
We have reached at the end of the first day training. Still if you have any confusion to identify the boundaries of EA ask me and be clear. You might have observed that in rural area we first identified the boundaries of villages in the mauza map and within village we have identified the boundaries of the Enumeration Areas. Every Eunmerator should bring all the houses, households and individulas in to the coverage of census of his assigned EA. Similarly we have identified the enumeration area in the mahallah maps in urban area and enumerator should ensure the coverage of every house, household and individuals of his assigned EA. You have also observed that we have demarketed EA having more or less 120 households. You must bring it to the notice of the zonal officer if there found inconsistency.

From today every Supervisor and Enumerators under his control formed a census working team. You must work in the field as complementary to each other so that none is left from the census. The load of work has been incorporated in such a way that the enumerator can do his assigned day to day work within the census period. There is no scope to make arear of his work. Those who will work very sincerity and accurately, they will be awarded Testimonials which will be evaluated any where in future.
We will assemble here tomorrow at 9.00 a.m again to rceived the training of the second day.
(Thank you very much)

[p. 10]

Chapter-2
Procedure for Filling out the Census Questionnaire
(Second day Training)

(At the beginning Zonal officer will take the attendance of the Eumerators and Supervisors prsent in the training class. If any Enumerator is absent in the training class mesures should taken in consultation with the Supervisor and Union Secretary/Ward Secretary)

2.1 Important Teams and Defintions used in the census:

Household: People those who taken food from the same kitechen and stayed the census night under the same roof/house constitute a household. Household may be formed with only one member or more than one member.

Example: Mr. Shahnoor along with his spouse and two children stayed the census night in the Govt. quarter no M-606, Satodal and taken food from the same ketchen. According to the definition of census Mr. Shahnoor, his spouse and two children will form a household. In the same night Mr. Rafiqul Islam, his spouse, one children, his mother and a maid servant stayed the census night in his village home located at the village Dhanki Mohera, Post: Ar-Moista, Upazila: Delduar, Zila: Tangail and taken food from the same kitchen. According to the definition of census this is also a household.
If any member of the household is engaged with night duty or on travel/journey he/she will be enumerated in his regular household.

Head of Household: The main person or person who is accepted by the members of the household as head of the household will be considered a head of the househod.

Census Momment: The zero hour 12:00 of the census night is called the census moment. The main objective of the census is to ensure the number of structures, households and population in the country on the census moment.

Example: In March 15 to 19, 2011 the Population and Housing Census of the country will be conducted. According to the definition of census the zero hour i.e, 12:00 hour of the census night is to be considered as census Moment.

Census Night: The time from census Moment i.e 12:00 hour to 6:00 a.m of the census night is to be considered as census night. All the floating population of the country will be brought under the coverage of the census in the census night.

Floating: People those who have no house or shelter for living and usually spent night at the railway sation, bus terminal, majar, footpath, staircase/under over bridge, lanch terminal, ferigaht, open space, varanda of markets will be considered as floating population. Besides the boarders spent the census night at residential hotel or rest house will also be considered as floating. The persons on duty and travellers on the census night will not be considered as floating, they will be enumerated in their respective households.

[p. 11]

Procedure of the Census: The census of 2011 will be conducted following the modified De-facto system. According to this system persons will be enumerated at the household or place where they spent the census night or will be enumerated as floating population of that place. In the census night if there is any guest or servant in the household and spent census night with the household they will be considered as a member of that household. Besides, the persons will be on duty in the census night (such as- Census workers, person on night duty in the office/institution, attendents of patients in the Hospital and doctor on night duty, security personel etc.) and travelers in the transport will be enumerated in their respective households. If anybody died before the census moment or any baby born after census moment will not be included in the census.

Census Period: The days and dates fixed for the Enumerators to enumerate popualation visiting door to door will be considered as census period. According to this definition from census moment to 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19 March, 2011 the days of Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday will be considered as census period.

2.2 Introduction to Questionnaire: Today we will discuss on the modules of Questionnaire and how many questions in each module. Today we will learn in details how to fillout the questionnaire, how to enter the number in English and how to fillout the appropriate box with cross symbols. Be careful that the cross must not overlap outside the box. The discussion sessions of today has been divided into four parts.

(1) Introduction to the Questionnaire;
(2) General Instructions to fill out the Questionnaire;
(3) Procedure to fill out the Questionnaire- Household Module (Ques-1a to Ques-11b); and
(4) Procedure of filling out the Questionnaire- Individual Module (Ques-12 to Ques-25).

At first I like to draw your attention on the Questionnaire kept in the census kit, you will find that there are two modules in the questionnaire. The upper module is for housing and households. In this module there are 14 questions of which the first question is `1' address of the households' and the last question is `11b, if the answer is yes enter the code for small commune of tribes.'
Now we have question 12 to 25 which are relating to the individuals. You will find in this module that there are ten lines in every page of the questionnaire and in each line information for only one individual may be entered.

2.3 Procedure for filling out the questionnaire:

The census Questionnaire has been designed in such a way so that ICR can capture the information. Generally the following four types of information could be collected through this questionnaire.

(1) Clearly entered names and addresses;
(2) Printed number;
(3) Entered numbers; and
(4) Cross symbols.

[p. 12]

Clearly Enter Names and Addreses: In Ques- 1a address of the household is to be entered clearly and similarly in Quest- 12 names of all the household members present in the census night should be entered in the reserved blank spaces clearly in English capital letters.

Printed Number: In Ques-13. serial number of household member is printed like 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0 which will automatically be captured.

Enter Number: A total of nine answers of the questions including part will be entered using 2B pencil in English. The questions are 1b, 2a, 2b, 5, 11b, 13, 14, 19 and 21. Enter the answers based on number very carefully in the specific boxes. While enteriing the number be sure that right hand side boxes bave been filled out. During entering household number, code and geo-code fill out the boxes at the left hand side if blank. Donot enter zero in he left hand side box while entering answer of Ques-2b.
Cross Symbole: To fill out answers for seventeen questions enter cross in the appropriate boxes. The questions are 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11a, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 22, 23, 24, and 25. There are empty boxes for alternative answer. Among these the appropriate answers will be entered in the specifie boxes with 2B pencil so that the crossed box became dark and clear and touch four of its corners and in no how it does not go outside crossing the line.
2.3.1 Procedure to Enter Answers in English: In Ques -13 of the questionnaire the single digits in English like 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0 is printed. Following these numbers enter the answers of Ques 1b, 2a, 2b, 5, 11b, 13, 14, 1 and 21 in English number. Take special care that while entering four in the check box do it like [X]. Answer of this question like will be mistake and the ICR will read 4 as.

[p. 13]
[instructions for making notations on the census form have been ommitted]
[p. 14]

2.3.3 Procedure to Reject the Questionnaire:
Reject the filled out questionnaire if all the answers of the questions are entered based on wrong information.
While rejecting a questionnaire enter cross [X] symbol in the reserved two boxes on the right side of Ques- 11 kept for 'Rejected Form'.
Fill out another questionnaire for this household. Before rejecting a questionnaire take permission from Zonal Officer.
2.3.4 Procedure to Reject Filled in Line for Individual or More:
Reject the filled in lines in the questionnaire filled out for the members of the households wrongly and could not be corrected. To reject lines enter corss [X] symbol in the boxes of question no-13 like [X] [X]. Before rejecting any line take permission from supervisor or zonal officer.
Special Instructions:
1.1Enter numbers in English in the check boxes. Example: [1][2][3]
1.2 Enter 4 in the check box like [4]
1.3 Enter cross within the boundary of check box [X]
1.4 Enter eigther cross or number in cheek box.

1.5 Collection of Information Following Serpentile Method.
Enumerate first the household located at the North-West corner of the EA. The serial number of the first household will be [0][0][1]. If the roads or path of this area is north-south direction then standup on South facing direction and start enumeration from the second household on the right side. In this way complete enumeration of all the households moving towards right. If the roads and path of this area is East-West direction then standup on east facing direction and enumerate the households moving towards right.
After completion of enumeration works of every EA the supervisor will sit together with all of his enumerators and discuss throughly and ensure that no household has left behind from the census and no household has enumerated twice. If there found any omission cover it instantly.
1.6: Call Back Enumeration Procedure:
While doing enumeration if there found no respondent is available in the household or due to other wise busy the respondent does not have time to attend the enumerator in such case enter household number with lumber chalk on the main gate of the household and also enter the same number in the questionnaire and `when you will come back' ask the respondent and come back accordingly to cover the household.
[p. 15]

2.4 Procedure of Filling out the Questionnaire- Household Module (Ques 1a - Ques 11b)

Collect information of the household visiting door to door and fill out the ICR form. First identify the household locating on the North-West corner using the map and go there. Now exchange salam with the head of household or a responsible member of household who knows everything about the members of the household and tell him that you might be aware that Population and Housing 2011 is going on all over the country and it will continue till 19th of this month. Government will use census data to formulate and implement development programs at the local level and national level as well. However according to the census Act all of your supplied data will be kept confidential by the government. I have been appointed by the government as an Enumerator to enumerate accurately all the population in this area. If you kindly permit me I can start the enumeration work. Then enter the household number 001 on the main gate of main house of the household with lumber chalk supplied to you.
[All the trainee Enumerators/Supervisors/Zonal officers/Coordinators will now fill out a questionnaire which is given in the training kit].

Question 1a. Address of the Household: In the first line of the blank space of this question enter the name or number of the House. In the second line enter name and number of the road/name of the para. In the third line enter the name of village/mohallah.

Example:
For Municipal area:
House no/Name: House no – 427
Road No./Name: Shaheed Mahboob Road
Name of Mahallah: Paschim Sewrapara
For Rural Area:
House/Para Name: Daksin Para
Village Name: Dhanki Mohera
Post office: Ar Moista


Enter the name of sector under the Mohallah name of necessary.

Question 1b. Continued Page:

For the household having less than10 members no need to fill out these two spaces. For the households having more than 10 members, for every 10 members fill out an additional page. Three pages will be filled out for a household having 26 members. In this case enter 01 of 03 in the first page, 02 of 03 in the second page and enter 03 of 03 in the third page.

Example: Enter number in the check box one by one at first page, second page and third page as follows:
[0][1] of [0][3]
[0][2] of [0][3]
[0][3] of [0][3]

Special Note: In no how the entered number must not go out side the check box. Verify the number entered into the check box with the numebr printed for Ques- 13.
Question -2a. Household Number:
Serial Number of Household must be entered in three digits in English. Serial number for the first household will be 001, for second household will be 002 etc. During filling out the questionnaire enter [0][0][2] for the first household and [0][0][2] for the second household in the reserved check boxes and do it like this for other households.

Exercise- 3:
((Now ask any body question) say for serial number of 60th and 113th households how the check box should be filled out? (Tell them to write in their manual)
[p. 16]
Question-2b. Number of Household Member:
If there are 6 members in the household enter [6] in the right box. No need to enter zero in the left side boxes. (Ask any body that if household member is fifteen how boxes should be entered? (Tell them to write in their manual).

Question -3. Floating
Floating population will be counted using the same questionnaire. Enter cross symbol in the 'yes' [X] box to count floating population and for enumeration of people living in the household enter cross symbol in the 'no' [X] box.
Enter address where the floating population is found in the blank space of Quest-1a.
Example: Kamlapur Rail station
Kamlapur, Dhaka

To count floating population no need to fill out any Questions in the household module. Enter information of every individual floating population in each line of individual module. If the floating population is more than 10, fill out each page for every 10 persons. At the same time fill out Ques- 1b. Don't fill out Ques- 2a and Ques- 4 to 11b for floating population. Count the boarders living in the residential hotels as floating population with the help of hotel administration.

Question -4. Type of Household:
Households are three types: Dwelling household, Institutional household and Other household.
Dwelling Household: Household live mainly for dwelling purpose will be considered as Dwelling Household.
Institutional Household: Orphange, Hospital, Clinic, Hotel, Jail, Barack will be considered as Institutional Household. For patients in the hospital and clinics a list will be prepared with the help Hospital Authorities and necessary questionnaires will be filled out. But doctors, nurses and other employee those who reside out side will be enumerated in their respective households.
Other Household: Peolple living in the mess, shops and trading centres, offices combinedly form household will be considered as other household. Considering the above enter cross symbol in the appropriate box

Question-5. Number of House/Structures:
A household may live in one structure or in a combination of structures. If a household occupy two bed rooms, one kitchen and a cow shed then the household will be considered having four house/ structures and enter 4 in the empty box. In a multistored building if there live four households enter [9] in the check box for the last household and for others enter zero for them.

Question-6. Type of the Main House of the Household:
The main house of the household has been categorized in to four categories on the bassis of its type. Such as pucca, semi pucca, kutcha and jupri. The structure which is recognized as main house by the members of the household, enter appropriate symbol for its type looking at the structure.

[p. 17]

Question -7. Tenancy of the House:
Tenancy of house has divided in to three categories. Such as owned, rented and rent free. Enter cross symbol in the appropriate box for its tenancy.

Question-8. Source of Drinking Water:
Source of drinking water is divided in to three categories for example- tap, tubewell and others. The source from which the household callect necessary drinking water indentifying the source enter cross in the appropriate box.

Question -9. Toilet Facility:
Considering the use toilet facility has been divided in to four categories such as sanitary (water sealed), sanitary (Non-water sealed). Non-sanitary and none. The toilet which is pit latrine with water sealed facility is called sanitary (water sealed). The latrine wich is pit latrine but having no water sealed facility is called sanitary (Non water sealed). The toilet which may be pucca, semi-pucca or kutch but having no facility to cover the discharge waste is called Non-sanitary. Such type of toilet is not free from water and environment polution. None means there is no toilet for the household usually uses to go bush, jungle or open space as and when necessary.
Ask the respondent that what type of toilet the household use. Enter cross in the appropriate box for the answer.

Question -10. Electricity Connection:
Ask the respondent and confirm whether the household is connected with electricity or not. Electricity generated from Bio-Gas and solar energy will be considered as electricity connected. If the electricity is available enter cross in the yes box and if none enter cross in the no box.

Question -11. Is it a Tribal Household?
If any head of household acknowledge themself as a tribal commune consider the household as Tribal. The people of Chakma, Marma, Tripura, Santhal, Garo, Khasia, Monipuri, Rakhain etc. community is considered as tribal. This is a very sensitive question. So be sure about the household before entering cross box. If the household is a tribal one enter cross in the yes box and enter cross in the no box for non-tribal.
If the household is tribal go to the back page of tally sheet and identify the community code for the household and enter cross in the appropriate box.
According to Cultural Institution of Tribal law 2010 the tribe has been categorised in to 27 categories. If there is more than this category code 28 has been fixed for them which have been presented at the opposite page of second Tally sheet as follows:
01 - Chakma
02 - Marma
03 - Tripura
04 - Mro
05 - Tonchonga
06 - Bom
07 - Pankhoa
08 - Chak
09 - Khying
10 - Khumi
11 - Lushai
12 - Kotch
13 - Shanthal
14 - Dalu
15 - Ushai(Usui)
16 - Rakhain
17 - Monipuri
18 - Garo
19 - Hazong
20 - Khashia
21 - Mong
22 - Orao
23 - Barman
24 - Pahari
25 - Malpahari
26 - Munda
27 - Kole
28 - Others

Example: Enter [0][1] if the community is chakma.

[p. 18]
The first session of training today is ended here. If you have any confusion or any item you are unable to understand tell me (If there is question explain in detail).
Now I shall ask 11 question to 11 of you. (Ask question addressing some one) Tell me what is the question at Ques- 1a. What you will enter for your household? In the same way one by one ask question 1b to 11b and evaluate the answer.

2.5 Procedure of Filling out the Questionnaire- Individual Module
(From Ques-12 to 25)

There are 14 questions in the individual module. 10 lines have been provided to collect information for the members of the households. In each line information for an individual is to be collected.

12. Names of the Household Members present in the Census Night (Start from head of household):
Enter the base names (the name known to all) of all the members of the households spent census night with the household following modified De-Facto system of census in block English letter. Folowing the verticle rule enter the name of the head of household in the first line clearly. If the name of the head of household is Md. Rafiqul Islam and the respondent say only Rafique then enter RAFIQ. Similarly in the second line enter the name of the spouse of the head. If the name of the wife of head is Khondoker Saida Nahid enter SAIDA, then starting from the youngest child enter names of all the children of them and step by step enter the names of other relatives and servants and maind servants if any in english block letters. Members of the households who were engaged in census work or night duty or travelling in any carrier include them as a member of this household.

13. Serial Number of the Members:
Don't enter zero for the household having 9 members or less than nine. While household member will be 10-19 enter 1 in the decenial box and 2 for household member 20-29. In the same time enter the answer of Ques-1b.

Question-14. Age (in completed years)
Collect the age information of the head of household first from 14 to 25 following the horizontal rule and next information of age for the spouse and other members of the household. The probing question is required to justify the accurate age data. In this case age of the youngest child, age at marrige, liberation war, cyclone of 1970, flood of 1988, and justify with historical events to project the acurate age and enter in the specifie box. Verify with national Identity Card (ID card)or any other valid document if possible. Enter [0][0] for age less than one year and for 100 years of age or more enter [9][9] in the specific box.

Question-15. Relationship with Head of Household:
Relationship with head of household has been categorized in to 5 categories and one column for every category in the questionnaire has been kept reserve.
For example:
1st Head of Household;
2nd Spouse of Head of Household;
3rd Children;
4th Other relatives; and
5th Non relative

Enter cross in the appropriate box for relationship of the members of the household.

[p. 19]

Question-16. Sex:
Enter cross in the male box for males.
Enter cross in the female box for females.
If the person is nutral (Hizra) ovserving the nature and behaviour enter cross in the male or female box as applicable.

Question-17. Marital Status:
Marital status has been categorized into four categories.
For unmarried enter cross in the 1st check box;
For married enter cross in the 2nd check box;
For widowed enter cross in the 3rd check box;
For divorced/separated/left cross in the 4th check box.

Question-18. Religion:
Religion has been categorized into 5 categories.
For Islam religion enter cross in the 1st check box;
For Hindu religion enter cross in the 2nd check box;
For Christian religion enter cross in the 3rd check box;
For Bhuddist religion enter cross in the 4th check box;
For other religion enter cross in the 5th check box.

Question-19. Is Disabled?
According to Disabled Welfare Act 2010 person who is by born or cause of others physically unable or completely/partly handicapped or mentally retarded is considered as Disabled. In this census as per recommendation of the Washington Group disabled has been categorized into six categories.
Ask the respondent is there any body in this household who is having trouble in speaking, seeing, listening, physical or mental. Ask in this regards.
For person having none of the above problem enter zero in the check box;
For person having problem in speaking enter [1] in the check box;
For person having problem in eye side even using spectacle enter [2] in the check box;
For person having listening problem even using Hearing Aid unable to listen enter [3]
For handicapped person unable to move freely enter [4] in the check box;
For person mentally retarded enter [5] in the check box;
For autistic person lack of intelligence enter [6] in the check box.

Question-20. Is currently student?
If the answer is yes enter cross in the yes check box.
For no enter cross in the no check box.

[p. 20]

Fill out Questions- 21 to 25 only for persons aged 7 years and over.

Question-21. Highest class passed:
Ask everybody beginning with the head of household that which highest class they passed. Enter the answer checking with the codes for class printed at opposite page of tally sheet in two digits in the check box. Codes for highest class passed are given below for the convenience of training:
00. No schooling/Not passed class I
01. Class I
02. Class II
03. Class III
04. Class IV
05. Class V
06. Class VI
07. Class VII
08. Class VIII
09. Class IX
10. SSC or Equivalent
12. HSC or Equivalent
15. Degree or Equivalent
16. Degree (Hons) or Equivalent
18. Masters or Equivalent
Example:
Enter class code [0][0] if reported no schooling or did not pass class one.
Enter [0][5] for person passed class five.
Enter [1][5] for person passed highest class Graduation and [1][8] for person passed Masters.

Question-22. Field of Education:
The field of education is divided into four categories. These are General, Vocational/Technical, Religious and not applicable.
General means persons who are qualified in science, arts, and commerce. Vocational/Technical means doctor, engineer agriculturist and technical training holders. Persons who got degree from Madrasa or other religious institutions will be considered in the category of religious. Enter cross in the appropriate check box.

Question-23. Able to Write Letter?
Ask all who are aged 7 years and over whether they are able to write letter or express their views in writing. Enter cross in the yes box for answer 'yes' and enter cross in the no box for answer 'no'.

Question-24. Working Status:
Working status has been categorized into four categories such as working, looking for work, household work and do not work. Enter a cross in the box for 'engaged in work' for working, enter a cross in the box for 'looking for work' for persons who are not currently working but willing for work, enter a cross in the box for 'household work' for persons who are engaged in household work, and enter a cross in the box for 'do not work' for persons who do not work or are unable to work.

Question-25. Field of Work if Employed:
If found employed or working in the earlier question- 24 category them in the three main categories such as agriculture, industry and service.

Person who are engaged most of the time in agricultural work, raising of livestock, fish culture/hatchery and work in the forest department as labour or employer enter cross in the box for agriculture, enter cross in the box for industry if most of time engaged in the [p. 21] industry/factory as labour or employer and enter cross in the box for service if most of the time engaged as a professional, service holder, or engaged in providing services (such as doctor, advocate, barber).
If you have any confusion to understand any question in the individual module from Quest-12 to 25 ask me. (If any question asked explain it initials) Now I shall ask 14 questions to 14 trainees of you (Ask addressing some one) Tell me which name you will enter in the first line of Ques-12? (In this way ask all the questions and evaluate)

2.6 Mock Training:
Now we will perform dress rehearsal of mock training. In this event three enumerators, three supervisors and three respondents will take part. The enumerators will ask questions, the respondents will answer the questions and the supervisors will supervise the operation. We all will observe, evaluate and choose the model procedure. All trainees after going home will fill out the second questionnaire of the first sheet for their own household.
(Thank you all).

[p. 21]

Chapter-3
Filling out the Questionnaire at the field level and evaluation
(Third Day Training)

Ques-3.1 Filling out the questionnaire at field level:
Now I shall take the attendance of you. Then all the supervisors along with the enumerators under their control will go to field to fill out the questionnaire for respective area. Supervisors will go to field with supervisor's area map, training questionnaires and computer list. The supervisors along with their enumerators will go to an enumeration area of their assignment and beginning from North-West corner following the serpentine method the enumerators will fill out two questionnaires for two households. Remember that while visiting a household the enumerator will exchange good wishes, select a responsible respondent and collect information for 25 questions from them for household and individual module. Within 12:00 o'clock all the supervisors will come back to the training class with filled in questionnaire.
[The zonal officers will listen to field experience of the supervisor and enumerators from 12:00 – 1:30 pm and verify their filled out questionnaires.]

Ques-3.2 Procedure of Filling out the Tally sheet
The procedure of filling out the tally sheet will be taught to you from 2:30 pm to 3:00 pm. There are three components of the tally sheet.
(1) The first component is for the identification of the enumeration area;
(2) The second component is for the summary of the households and population; and
(3) The third component is for the identification of the enumerator, supervisor, zonal officer and the person engaged for inventory.
1st component is for the Identification of the Enumration Area:
Enter the geo-code for the division, zila, upazila/thana/union/ward, mauza/mahallah and village where the enumeration area is located. At last enter the no. of enumeration area. One thing must keep in memory that in case of municipal area 00 will be entered for vilaages.
2nd component is for the summary of the household and population (including inventory of census books): To be made for every filled in census books:
Count from the fill out Questionnaire books out of total households enter the number of Dwelling Household in the check box of 1st line, number of institutional households in the check box of second line, number of other households in the check box of third line and the number of total households in check box of fourth line. In the same way out of total population count the number of male population and enter the number in the check box of first line, number of female population in the check box of second line and number of total population in the check box of third line in English.
Enter the appropriate code in the check box for RMO code. Enter [1] of [1] for census books if only one census book is filled out for an enumeration area. Enter [1] of [2] in the tally sheet of the 1st book and [2] of [2] for the 2nd book if two census books are filled out for an enumeration area.
3rd component is for the identification of Enumerator, Supervisor, Zonal Officer and the person responsible for making inventory:
Enter name of the enumerator in the 1st line and then enter cross in the male box if the enumrator is male and cross in the female box if the enumerator is female and fill out the blank box for number from the number given in the appointment card. Similarly the 2nd line is for the supervisor. In the 3rd line enter the name of the zonal officer, sex, number and signature and in the fourth line name of the inventor, sex, number and signature.
N. B.: For each and every filled in census books tally sheet must be filled out independently for every enumeration area and both the two tally sheets of every filled in census books must be filled out.

[p. 23]

3.3 Conducting of Census and Calender:
A census calender has been prepared to conduct the census, in order to control the census, imparting of the training, to verify wheather any body has been left from the census, filling out of tally sheet, disbursement of honorarium and for the submission of census materials at the same time all over the country. Enumerators and supervisors will follow the calender in performing their respective duties which are as follows:
[the calender has been omitted]
Filling out of Control Form-6:
All the supervisors after completion of enumeration will fill out control Form-6 appended at page-22. In this form every line will be filled out for an Enumerator and information from column 1 to 13 will be collected from tally sheet. The rest columns 14 to 19 will be filled out for census books received, filled out census books, blank books, pencils etc. after verfication.

Census Publicity:
Zonal officer and supervisors will announce the following statement during publicity and Miking:

[p. 24]

Respected resident "Population and Housing Census 2011 will begin from 15 March (or going on as applicable) all over the country. The enumerators will visit door to door to collect your information. It will continue up to Saturday the 19 March, 2011. Census data is very important to formulate and implement development programmes at local and national level as well. So, for the national interest be included in the census enumeration and encourage others to be included."

[p. 25]

[form for summary of supervisor's area has been ommited]
[a filled out census form has been omitted]
[p. 26]
